A

Recording

with permission, from Sommer and Wurtz 2008. Copyright © 2008 by Annual Reviews.) A. One possible pathway for the corollary discharge originates in saccade-generating neurons in the superior colliculus, passes through the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, and termi-

<!-- image -->

nates in the frontal eye field (FEF) in the frontal cortex. 1. Fixation A Task for perceived eye direction 2. Saccade to target; target displaced

rightward

A. At the start of each trial, the monkey fixates a target on a Baseline MD inactivated

100 ms

the cell's current receptive field is unaffected (upper records),

whereas the response to a stimulus in a future (post-saccade) receptive field is severely impaired (lower records). This result demonstrates that a corollary discharge from the saccade motor program directs the shift in the neuron's receptive field properties. B Change in perceptual location

3. Monkey turns bar

indicating displacement

direction

1.00

screen (1). When the fixation point is turned off, the monkey makes a saccade to the target; during the saccade, the target

<!-- image -->

is displaced randomly (up to 3°) either to the left or to the right (2). After the saccade to the original target, the monkey receives a reward for manually moving a bar in the direction of the target displacement (3).

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 586


Target displacement

(degrees forward)

B. Psychometric curves before (black) and after (purple) inac-

tivation of the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, which

contains the relay neurons for the corollary discharge in its

pathway between the superior colliculus and the frontal cortex. The curve shows the proportion of forward (in the direction of the saccade) judgments (y-axis) for each target displacement (x-axis). The post-saccadic target location at which the monkey perceived no displacement is defined as the perceptual null location. (Adapted, with permission, from Cavanaugh et al. 2016.)

19/01/21 4:03 PM

We take this point to be the monkey's perception of the

original target location. If the target were not perceived

to move, it must be in the same location as before the Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action


every saccade. This so-called saccadic suppression

was first seen in the superior colliculus and has subse-

quently been seen in the thalamus and areas of visual

-cortex beyond primary visual cortex. A corollary discharge contributes to this neuronal activity suppression because the suppression occurs even in total darkness (no vision) and even if eye

saccade; in a normal monkey, that point is close to zero (Figure 25–5B). We now have a corollary discharge that can provide the vector for each saccade and a task for a mon key that allows us to determine where it perceives the

target to be at the end of the saccade. If the corollary discharge contributes to the monkey's perception, then inactivating the corollary discharge should change the animal's perception of target location. It does. The purple curve in Figure 25–5B represents the perceived location after corollary discharge inactivation; the curve shifts to the left after inactivation of the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus. The conclusion is that the corollary discharge does provide the vector of the saccade, which is necessary for the monkey to perceive that the target had moved. With each saccade, corollary discharge information provides perceptual information for determining the amplitude and direction of the current saccade, and it does so with machine-like precision several times per second. The corollary discharge provides the vector information available before the saccade is made, but it is not the only source of information. Two other types of movement is blocked (no proprioception). Suppression can also be produced by visual masking, which occurs when one stimulus reduces the perception of a following or preceding stimulus. If a saccade starts in total darkness, and an object is then flashed and extinguished before the saccade ends, a blur can be seen during the saccade. If a mask is flashed after the saccade, the blur is suppressed. A correlate of such a masking effect is clearly seen in neurons in primary visual cortex. The suppression resulting from a corollary discharge is relatively weak but is present with all saccades; that from visual masking is much stronger but is present only in the light. Oculomotor Proprioception Can Contribute to Spatially Accurate Perception and Behavior

information must be evaluated after the saccade has taken place: visual cues and eye muscle proprioception. Visual cues are unlikely to be a factor in the perceptual experiment described (Figure 25–5) because the experiment was done in total darkness except for light scattered from the very dim fixation point and saccade target. In the light, however, could visual cues be a factor? In fact, repeating the experiment in the light did not improve the monkey's judgment and frequently made it worse. Oculomotor proprioception is unlikely to provide the vector information at the end of the saccade because, on average, the metrics of the saccades before

and during inactivation do not change, so there is little reason to expect that the muscle proprioception will have changed. In addition, while the corollary discharge begins at least 100 ms before the saccade, neuronal activity from oculomotor proprioception reaches the lateral intraparietal area about 150 ms after the saccade. As we will see in the next section, the role of proprioception in perception might be to provide information long after the saccade ends. Finally, there is a second potential disruption of vision produced by saccades: a blur as the saccade sweeps the visual scene across the retina. The blur is

not seen, however, because neuronal activity in a number of visual areas is suppressed around the time of

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 587

## Charles Sherrington suggested that the way the brain compensates for a moving eye is to measure directly where the eyes are in the orbit and adjust the visual

signal for changes in position. Richard Andersen and Vernon Mountcastle discovered that the responses of parietal visual neurons with retinotopic receptive fields are modulated by the position of the eye in the orbit in a linear fashion called the gain field (Figure 25–6). From this relationship, the position of an object in head-centered (craniotopic) coordinates can easily be calculated. Where does the eye position signal that creates the gain fields come from? It could come from a corollary discharge of eye position, or it could come from a pro-

prioceptive mechanism. Human eye muscles have two structures that could contribute to oculomotor proprioception: muscle spindles and myotendinous cylinders, or palisade endings, an eye-specific structure. Area 3a, the region of somatosensory cortex to which skeletal muscle spindles project, has a representation of the position of the eye, which arises from proprioceptors in the contralateral orbit (Figure 25–7). However, the proprioceptive measurement of eye position lags changes in eye position by 60 ms, and for 150 ms after a saccade, the gain fields modulate the vis-

ual response as if the monkey were still looking at the presaccadic target, long after the corollary discharge has remapped the visual response. Therefore, the eye position signal creating the gain fields probably arises from a proprioceptive mechanism. The possibility

19/01/21 4:03 PM


tive fields.

Part IV / Perception

40°

40°

A. Receptive field relative to the fovea. Contour plot indicates spike rates for different spatial locations. Numbers are spikes per second for each contour at the maximum position.

<!-- image -->

B. The receptive field moves in space with the eye. On the left the monkey is fixating the center of the screen. On the right the same monkey is fixating 20° to the left of center. For the

- exists that the brain calculates the spatial location of an object that appeared before an eye movement using

two mechanisms: a corollary discharge that is rapid

and a proprioceptive signal that is slow but can be more accurate than the corollary discharge. The proprioceptive signal can also be used to calibrate the corollary discharge. Visual Scrutiny Is Driven by Attention and

Arousal Circuits

## In the 19th century, William James described attention as "the taking possession by the mind in clear and

vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultane

(20,20)

(20,–20)

recordings in C, the stimulus (blue square) is always presented

C. Responses to a stimulus at the optimum location in the

receptive field change as a function of the position of the eye in the orbit, from a maximum when the monkey fixates a point

at −20°,20° to a minimum when the monkey fixates a point at 20°,−20°. Arrows indicate onset of stimulus flash. Trial duration, 1.5 sec; ordinate, 25 spikes/division. (Adapted, with permission, from Andersen, Essick, and Siegel 1985. Copyright © 1985 AAAS.) passive immediate sensorial attention the stimulus is a sense-impression, either very intense, voluminous, or

sudden … big things, bright things, moving things …

blood." Your attention to this page as you read it is an example of voluntary attention. If a bright light suddenly flashed, your attention would probably be pulled

-away involuntarily from the page. Large changes in the visual scene that occur outside the focus of atten -tion are often missed until the subject directs attention to them, a phenomenon referred to as change blindness (Figure 25–8). Voluntary attention is closely linked to saccadic eye movements because the fovea has a much denser array of cones than the peripheral retina (Chapter 17)

ously possible objects or trains of thought. It implies withdrawal from some things in order to deal effectively with others." James went on to describe two different kinds of attention: "It is either passive, reflex, non-voluntary, effortless or active and voluntary. In

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 588

and moving the fovea to an attended object permits a finer-grain analysis than is possible with peripheral vision. Attention that selects a point in space, whether or not it is accompanied by a saccade, is called spatial attention. Searching for a specific kind of object, for

19/01/21 4:03 PM

0°, 15

°

Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action

Area 3a

<!-- image -->

position and the activity of the neuron after the monkey made

a saccade to the eye position indicated above each raster. The example a red O among red and green Qs, involves

a second kind of attention, feature attention: In your

search, you ignore the green letters and attend only to

the red ones. Attention, both voluntary and involuntary, shortens reaction time and makes visual perception more sensitive. This increased sensitivity includes the abili-

ties to detect objects at a lower contrast and ignore distracters close to an attended object. The abrupt appearance of a behaviorally irrelevant cue, such as a light flash, reduces the reaction time to a test stimulus presented 300 ms later in the same place. Conversely, when the cue appears away from the test stimulus, the reaction time is increased. The light flash draws involuntary attention to its location, thus accelerating the visual response to the test stimulus. Similarly, when a subject plans a saccade to a particular part of the visual field, the contrast threshold at which any object there can be detected is improved 50% by a cue. Clinical studies have long implicated the parietal lobe in visual attention. Patients with lesions of the

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 589

+15


–15


spikes/s

neuron responds much more briskly when the eye is at 0°,15°

than when it is at 0°,0°. (Reproduced, with permission, from

Wang et al. 2007.)

right parietal lobe have normal visual fields. When

their visual perception is studied with a single stim-

ulus in an uncomplicated visual environment, their

responses are normal. However, when presented with a more complicated visual environment, with objects in the left and right visual hemifields, these patients tend to report less of what lies in the left hemifield (contralateral to their lesion) than in the right hemifield (ipsilateral to their lesion). This deficit, known as neglect (Chapter 59), arises because attention is focused on the visual hemifield ipsilateral to the lesion. Even when patients are presented with only two stimuli, one in each hemifield, they report seeing only the stimulus in the ipsilateral hemifield. When attention is focused on one stimulus in the affected hemifield and a sec -ond stimulus is presented in the unaffected hemifield, patients do not have the ability to shift attention to the new stimulus, even though the sensory pathway from the eye to the striate and prestriate cortex is intact. This neglect of the contralateral visual hemifield extends to the neglect of the contralateral half of

19/01/21 4:03 PM



Part IV / Perception

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 590

Figure 25–8 Change blindness. In a test for change blindness,

one picture is presented followed by a blank screen for 80 ms,

followed by the second picture, another blank screen, and a

individual objects (Figure 25–9). Patients with right repeat of the cycle (left). The subject is asked to report what changed in the scene. Although there is a substantial difference between the two pictures, it takes multiple repetitions for most observers to detect the difference. (Reproduced, with permission, from Ronald Rensink.)

parietal lobe deficits often have difficulty reproducing

drawings. When asked to draw a clock, for example,

they may force all of the numbers into the right side of the clock's face, or when asked to bisect a line, they may place the midline well to the right of the line's actual center. The process of attentional selection is evident at the level of single parietal neurons in the monkey. The responses of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area

to a visual stimulus depend not only on the physical properties of the stimulus but also on its importance

Figure 25–9 Drawing of a candlestick by a patient with a

lesion of the right parietal lobe.  The patient neglects the left

side of the candlestick, drawing only its right half. (Reproduced,

with permission, from Halligan and Marshall 2001. Copyright © 2001 Academic Press.)

<!-- image -->

19/01/21 4:03 PM

to the monkey. Thus, the responses to a behaviorally

irrelevant stimulus are much smaller than for any

event that evokes attention, such as the abrupt onset of

a visual stimulus in the receptive field or the planning of a saccade to the receptive field of the neuron. Although neurons in the lateral intraparietal area collectively represent the entire visual hemifield, the neurons active at any one moment represent only the

important objects in the hemifield, a priority map of the visual field. The lateral intraparietal area acts as a summing junction for a number of different signals: saccade planning, abrupt stimulus onset, and the cognitive aspects of a searched-for feature.

Box 25–1 The Priority Map in Parietal Cortex

## Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area of the monkey represent only those objects of potential importance

to the monkey, a priority map of the visual field. This

selectivity for objects of behavioral importance can be demonstrated by recording from neurons in a monkey while the animal makes eye movements across a stable array of objects . Stable objects in the visual world are rarely the objects of attention. In the lateral intraparietal area, as

Figure 25–10 Exploring a stable array of objects.  The

monkey views a screen with a number of objects that

remain in place throughout the experiment. The monkey's Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action


The absolute value of the neuronal response evoked

by an object does not by itself determine whether that

animal is attending to that object. When a monkey plans

a saccade to a stimulus in the visual field, attention is on the goal of the saccade, and the activity evoked by the saccade plan lies at the peak of the priority map. However, if a bright light appears elsewhere in the visual field, attention is involuntarily drawn to the bright light, which evokes more neuronal activity than does the saccade plan. Thus, the locus of attention can be identified only by examining the entire priority map and choosing its peak; it cannot be identified by monitoring activity at any one point alone (Box 25–1).

in most other visual centers of the brain, neuronal recep-

tive fields are retinotopic; that is, they are defined rela-

tive to the center of gaze. As a monkey scans the visual

field, fixed objects enter and leave the receptive fields of neurons with every eye movement without disrupting the monkey's attention (Figure 25–10). The abrupt appearance of a visual stimulus involuntarily evokes attention. When a task-irrelevant light flashes in the receptive field of a lateral intraparietal

Fixation point Saccade

Receptive field

included in the receptive field of a neuron (left), or the

monkey can make a saccade that brings one of the objects

into the receptive field (right). (Reproduced, with permis-

gaze can be positioned so that none of the objects are

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 591

sion, from Kusunoki, Gottlieb, and Goldberg 2000.)

(continued)

19/01/21 4:03 PM


Part IV / Perception

The Parietal Cortex Provides Visual

Information to the Motor System

## Vision interacts with the supplementary and premotor cortices to prepare the motor system for action. For

example, when you pick up a pencil, your fingers are

separated from your thumb by the width of the pencil; when you pick up a drink, your fingers are separated from your thumb by the width of the glass. The visual system helps to adjust the grip width before your hand arrives at the object. Similarly, when you insert a letter into a mail slot, your hand is aligned to place the letter in the slot. If the slot is tilted, your hand tilts to match.

Patients with lesions of the parietal cortex can-

not adjust their grip width or wrist angle using visual information alone, even though they can verbally

describe the size of the object or the orientation of the slot. Conversely, patients with intact parietal lobes and deficits in the ventral stream cannot describe the size of an object or its orientation but can adjust their grip width and orient their hands as well as normal sub -jects can. Neurons in parietal cortex are a critical source of information needed to manipulate or move objects.

Box 25–1 The Priority Map in Parietal Cortex (continued)

## neuron, that cell responds briskly (Figure 25–11A). In contrast, a stable, task-irrelevant stimulus evokes little

response when eye movement brings it into the neu-

ron's receptive field (Figure 25–11B). It is possible that the saccade that brings the stable object into the receptive field suppresses the visual response. This is not the case. A second experiment uses

a similar array, except there is no stimulus at the location to which the saccade had brought the receptive field in

neuronal activity and eye positions are plotted across time.

A. A stimulus flashes in the receptive field while the monkey fixates.

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 592

the stable array experiment. The monkey fixates so that

no member of the array is in the receptive field, and then

the task-irrelevant stimulus suddenly appears at the post-

saccade location of the receptive field. Now the monkey makes a saccade to the center of the array, bringing the recently appeared stimulus into the receptive field, and the cell fires intensely (Figure 25–11C). When the monkey makes the saccade, the two arrays are identical. However, the stable stimulus is presumably unattended,

Stimulus

Appearance

Disappearance Presence of stimulus In receptive field Outside receptive field

<!-- image -->

C. The monkey makes a saccade that brings the location

- of the recent light flash into the receptive field.

19/01/21 4:03 PM

The neural operations behind visually guided move-

ments involve identifying targets, specifying their

qualities, and ultimately generating a motor program

to accomplish the movement. Neurons in the parietal cortex provide the visual information necessary for independent movement of the fingers. The representation of space in the parietal cortex is not organized into a single map like the retinotopic map in primary visual cortex. Instead, it is

divided into at least four areas (LIP, MIP, VIP, AIP) that analyze the visual world in ways appropriate for individual motor systems. These four areas

whereas the recently flashed stimulus evokes attention

and a much larger response. Stable objects can evoke

enhanced responses when they become relevant to the

animal's current behavior.

each trial, one object in a stable array becomes significant Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action


project visual information to the areas of premotor

and frontal cortex that control individual voluntary

movements (Figure 25–13).

Neurons in the medial intraparietal area describe the targets for reaching movements and project to the premotor area that controls reaching movements. The

anterior intraparietal cortex has neurons that signal the size, depth, and orientation of objects that can be grasped. Neurons in this area respond to stimuli that could be the targets for a grasping movement, and these neurons are also active when the animal makes the movement (Figure 25–14). Neurons in the lateral

A stable object can also be made behaviorally impor-

tant. In that case, the neurons increase their firing rate

when the monkey has to attend to the stable object brought

Fixation Point Receptive field into the receptive field by the saccade (Figure 25–12) .

Cue identifying target

of second saccade

to the monkey because the monkey must make a saccade to it. The monkey fixates a point outside the array, and a cue that matches an object in the array appears outside the neuron's receptive field. The monkey must then make a saccade to the center of the array and a second saccade to the object that matches the cue. Two experiments are shown (in parts A and B). The left panel shows the neuron's response to the appearance of the cue outside the receptive field, the center panel shows the response after the first saccade brings the cued object into the receptive

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 593

Second saccade

Second

saccade

shown here in green for clarity but were black in the

experiment. The visual scene at the time of the saccade is identical in both experiments. A. The monkey is trained to make the second saccade to the cued object; the cell fires intensely when the first saccade brings the object into the receptive field.

B. The monkey is trained to make the second saccade to an object outside the receptive field; the cell fires much less when the saccade brings the task-irrelevant stimulus

into the receptive field.

19/01/21 4:03 PM


Part IV / Perception

Figure 25–13 Pathways involved in visual processing

for action.  The dorsal visual pathway (blue) extends

to the posterior parietal cortex and then to the frontal

## cortex. The ventral visual pathway (pink) is considered in

Chapter 24. There are bidirectional projections from the inferior temporal cortex to the prefrontal cortex. (Abbreviations: AIP, anterior intraparietal cortex; FEF , frontal eye field; IT, inferior temporal cortex; LIP, lateral intraparietal cortex; MIP, medial intraparietal cortex; MST, medial superior temporal cortex; MT, middle temporal cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; PMd , PMv, dorsal and ventral premotor cortices; TEO, occipitotemporal cortex; VIP, ventral intraparietal cortex; V1–V4, areas of visual cortex.)

MIP

LIP

<!-- image -->

Viewing the object VIP

Reaching for the object

<!-- image -->

Figure 25–14 Neurons in the ante-

rior intraparietal cortex respond

selectively to specific shapes. The

neuron shown here is selective for

a rectangle, whether viewing the object or reaching for it. The neuron is not responsive to the cylinder in either case. (Reproduced, with permission, from Murata et al. 2000.)

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 594

PMd V1



Spike/s

19/01/21 4:03 PM

Tactile stimulus Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action Visual stimulus

of the monkey's head or to a visual stimulus coming toward intraparietal area specify the targets for saccades, and

<!-- image -->

project to the frontal eye field

.

Because a monkey cannot see its mouth, the ventral

intraparietal area has bimodal neurons that respond to tactile stimuli on the face (Figure 25–15) and to objects

in the visual world that are approaching the tactile receptive field, allowing the brain to estimate that an object is near the mouth. The ventral intraparietal area projects to the face area of premotor cortex. Highlights

1.

The image of the world enters the brain via the

eye, which is constantly moving in the head. The

visual system must compensate for changes in

- eye position to calculate spatial locations from retinal locations. Helmholtz postulated that the brain solves this problem by feeding back the motor signal that drives the eye to the visual system, to compensate for the effect of the eye movement. This motor feedback to the visual system is called corollary discharge. 2. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area, which provides visual information to the oculomotor system, show evidence of this corollary dis-
- charge. Neurons that ordinarily do not respond to a particular stimulus in space will respond to it

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 595

200 ms

the head, but not to the same stimulus moving away from the

head. (Reproduced, with permission, from Duhamel, Colby, and

if an impending saccade will bring that stimulus

into its receptive field.

This receptive field remapping depends on a

3.

- pathway that goes from the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus to the medial dorsal
- nucleus of the thalamus to the frontal eye field. Medial dorsal nucleus inactivation impairs monkeys' ability to identify where their eyes land after a saccade, suggesting the corollary discharge has a perceptual as well as a motor role. 4. Sherrington postulated that the brain uses eye position to calculate the spatial location of objects from the position of their images on the
- retina. There is a representation of eye position in somatosensory cortex. Eye position modulates the visual responses of parietal neurons, and target position in space is simple to calculate from this modulation. 5. An unanswered question is how the brain chooses between the eye position and corollary discharge mechanisms to determine spatial posi-
- tion. Because corollary discharge precedes the change in eye position and proprioception follows it, could the brain use both positions at different times? 6. Attention is the ability of the brain to select objects in the world for further analysis. Without attention, spatial perception is severely limited. For

19/01/21 4:03 PM
Tactile stimulus Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action Visual stimulus

of the monkey's head or to a visual stimulus coming toward intraparietal area specify the targets for saccades, and

<!-- image -->

project to the frontal eye field

.

Because a monkey cannot see its mouth, the ventral

intraparietal area has bimodal neurons that respond to tactile stimuli on the face (Figure 25–15) and to objects

in the visual world that are approaching the tactile receptive field, allowing the brain to estimate that an object is near the mouth. The ventral intraparietal area projects to the face area of premotor cortex. Highlights

1.

The image of the world enters the brain via the

eye, which is constantly moving in the head. The

visual system must compensate for changes in

- eye position to calculate spatial locations from retinal locations. Helmholtz postulated that the brain solves this problem by feeding back the motor signal that drives the eye to the visual system, to compensate for the effect of the eye movement. This motor feedback to the visual system is called corollary discharge. 2. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area, which provides visual information to the oculomotor system, show evidence of this corollary dis-
- charge. Neurons that ordinarily do not respond to a particular stimulus in space will respond to it

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 595

200 ms

the head, but not to the same stimulus moving away from the

head. (Reproduced, with permission, from Duhamel, Colby, and

if an impending saccade will bring that stimulus

into its receptive field.

This receptive field remapping depends on a

3.

- pathway that goes from the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus to the medial dorsal
- nucleus of the thalamus to the frontal eye field. Medial dorsal nucleus inactivation impairs monkeys' ability to identify where their eyes land after a saccade, suggesting the corollary discharge has a perceptual as well as a motor role. 4. Sherrington postulated that the brain uses eye position to calculate the spatial location of objects from the position of their images on the
- retina. There is a representation of eye position in somatosensory cortex. Eye position modulates the visual responses of parietal neurons, and target position in space is simple to calculate from this modulation. 5. An unanswered question is how the brain chooses between the eye position and corollary discharge mechanisms to determine spatial posi-
- tion. Because corollary discharge precedes the change in eye position and proprioception follows it, could the brain use both positions at different times? 6. Attention is the ability of the brain to select objects in the world for further analysis. Without attention, spatial perception is severely limited. For

19/01/21 4:03 PM



Part IV / Perception

example, humans have great difficulty noticing a

change in the visual world unless their attention

is drawn to the spatial location of a change.

7. The activity of neurons in the parietal cortex predicts a monkey's locus of spatial attention as measured by their perceptual thresholds. The
2. parietal cortex sums a number of different signals— motor, visual, cognitive—to create a priority map of the visual field. The motor system uses this map to choose targets for movement. The visual system uses the same map to find the locus of visual attention. 8. Lesions in the parietal cortex cause a neglect of the contralateral visual world. 9. Visual information provided by the parietal cor-
3. tex enables the motor system to adjust hand grip to match the size of the object to which it reaches
4. before the hand actually lands on the target. By contrast, patients with perceptual deficits caused by lesions in inferior temporal cortex adjust their grip perfectly well even though they cannot describe the nature or size of the object to which they reach perfectly. 10. There are at least four different visual maps in the intraparietal sulcus, each of which corresponds to a particular motor workspace.
11. Neurons in the anterior intraparietal area respond to targets for grasping, respond even when monkeys make grasping movements in total darkness,
6. and project to the grasp region of premotor cortex. 12. Neurons in the ventral intraparietal area respond to objects coming toward the mouth, have tactile receptive fields on the face, and project to the
7. mouth area of premotor cortex. 13. Neurons in the medial intraparietal area have a representation of arm position and respond to targets for reaching.
14. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area respond to targets for eye movements and objects of visual attention, discharge before eye movements,
9. and have a representation of eye position. Activity of these neurons is modulated by the position of the eyes in the orbit. 15. Neurons in the face region of area 3a in the somatosensory cortex have a representation of the position of the eye in the orbit that arises from
10. the contralateral eye.

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 596

Selected Reading

Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. Attention, intention, and pri-

ority in the parietal lobe. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:1–21.

Cohen YE, Andersen RA. 2002. A common reference frame

- for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:553–562.
- Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1999. Space and attention in parietal cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:319–349. Henderson JM, Hollingworth A. 1999. High-level scene per-
- ception. Annu Rev Psychol 50:243–271. Milner AD, Goodale MA. 1996. The Visual Brain in Action.
- Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. Rensink RA. 2002. Change detection. Annu Rev Psychol
- 53:245–277. Ross J, Ma-Wyatt A. 2004. Saccades actively maintain percep-
- tual continuity. Nat Neurosci 7:65–69. Sommer MA, Wurtz RH. 2008. Brain circuits for the inter-
- nal monitoring of movements. Annu Rev Neurosci 31:317–338.
- Sun LD, Goldberg ME. 2016. Corollary discharge and oculomotor proprioception: cortical mechanisms for spatially accurate vision. Annu Rev Vis Sci 2:61–84.
- Wurtz RH. 2008. Neuronal mechanisms of visual stability. Vision Res 48:2070–2089. Yarbus AL. 1967. Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum.
- References
- Andersen RA, Essick GK, Siegel RM. 1985. Encoding of

spatial location by posterior parietal neurons. Science

230:456–458.

- Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2003. Neuronal activity in the lateral intraparietal area and spatial attention. Science 299:81–86. Cavanaugh J, Berman RA, Joiner WM, Wurtz RH. 2016.
- Saccadic corollary discharge underlies stable visual perception. J Neurosci 36:31–42.
- Cohen YE, Andersen RA. 2002. A common reference frame for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:553–562.
- Deubel H, Schneider WX, Bridgeman B. 1996. Postsaccadic target blanking prevents saccadic suppression of image displacement. Vision Res 36:985–996.
- Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1992. The updating of the representation of visual space in parietal cortex by intended eye movements. Science 255:90–92.
- Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1998. Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque: congruent visual and somatic response properties. J Neurophysiol 79:126–136.
- Duhamel J-R, Goldberg ME, FitzGibbon EJ, Sirigu A, Grafman J. 1992. Saccadic dysmetria in a patient with a right frontoparietal lesion: the importance of corollary dis-
- charge for accurate spatial behavior. Brain 115:1387–1402. Goodale MA, Meenan JP, Bulthoff HH, Nicolle DA, Murphy KJ, Racicot CI. 1994. Separate neural pathways for the visual analysis of object shape in perception and prehen-
- Michael E. Goldberg Robert H. Wurtz sion. Curr Biol 4:604–610. Hallett PE, Lightstone AD. 1976. Saccadic eye movements to
- flashed targets. Vision Res 16:107–114.

19/01/21 4:03 PM

Halligan PW, Marshall JC. 2001. Graphic neglect—more than

the sum of the parts. Neuro Image 14:S91–S97.

Henderson JM, Hollingworth A. 2003. Global transsaccadic

- change blindness during scene perception. Psychol Sci 14:493–497.
- Kusunoki M, Gottlieb J, Goldberg ME. 2000. The lateral intraparietal motion, and task relevance. Vision Res 40:1459–1468. Morrone MC, Ross J, Burr DC. 1997. Apparent position of
- visual targets during real and simulated saccadic eye movements. J Neurosci 17:7941–7953.
- Murata A, Gallese V, Luppino G, Kaseda M, Sakata H. 2000. Selectivity for the shape, size, and orientation of objects for grasping in neurons of monkey parietal area AIP.
- J Neurophysiol 83:2580–2601. Nakamura K, Colby CL. 2002. Updating of the visual representation in monkey striate and extrastriate cortex during saccades. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:4026–4031.
- Perenin MT, Vighetto A. 1988. Optic ataxia: a specific disruption in visuomotor mechanisms. I. Different aspects of the deficit in reaching for objects. Brain 111:643–674.
- Rensink RA. 2002. Change detection. Annu Rev Psychol 53:245–277.

Kandel-Ch25\_0582-0597.indd 597

Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action


Rizzolatti G, Luppino G, Matelli M. 1998. The organization of

the cortical motor system: new concepts. Electroencepha-

logr Clin Neurophysiol 106:283–296.

- Snyder LH, Batista AP, Andersen RA. 1997. Coding of intention in the posterior parietal cortex. Nature 386:167–170. Thiele A, Henning P, Kubischik M, Hoffmann KP. 2002.
- Neural mechanisms of saccadic suppression. Science 295:2460–2462.
- Umeno MM, Goldberg ME. 1997. Spatial processing in the monkey frontal eye field. I. Predictive visual responses. J Neurophysiol 78:1373–1383.
- Walker MF, Fitzgibbon EJ, Goldberg ME. 1995. Neurons in the monkey superior colliculus predict the visual result of impending saccadic eye movements. J Neurophysiol
- 73:1988–2003. Wang X, Zhang M, Cohen IS, Goldberg ME. 2007. The proprioceptive representation of eye position in monkey primary somatosensory cortex. Nat Neurosci 10:640–646.
- Xu B, Karachi C, Goldberg M. 2012. The postsaccadic unreliability of gain fields renders it unlikely that the motor system can use them to calculate target position in space.
- Neuron 76:1201–1209.

19/01/21 4:03 PM


Auditory Processing by the Cochlea

The Ear Has Three Functional Parts

Hearing Commences With the Capture of Sound Energy

by the Ear

## The Hydrodynamic and Mechanical Apparatus of the Cochlea

## Delivers Mechanical Stimuli to the Receptor Cells The Basilar Membrane Is a Mechanical Analyzer of

## Sound Frequency The Organ of Corti Is the Site of Mechanoelectrical

Transduction in the Cochlea Hair Cells Transform Mechanical Energy Into

Neural Signals Deflection of the Hair Bundle Initiates

## Mechanoelectrical Transduction Mechanical Force Directly Opens Transduction Channels

Direct Mechanoelectrical Transduction Is Rapid

Deafness Genes Provide Components of the Mechanotransduction Machinery

Dynamic Feedback Mechanisms Determine the Sensitivity of

the Hair Cells Hair Cells Are Tuned to Specific Stimulus Frequencies

## Hair Cells Adapt to Sustained Stimulation

Sound Energy Is Mechanically Amplified in the Cochlea

Cochlear Amplification Distorts Acoustic Inputs

The Hopf Bifurcation Provides a General Principle for Sound Detection

Hair Cells Use Specialized Ribbon Synapses

Auditory Information Flows Initially Through the Cochlear Nerve

## Bipolar Neurons in the Spiral Ganglion Innervate

## Cochlear Hair Cells

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 598

Cochlear Nerve Fibers Encode Stimulus Frequency

and Level

Sensorineural Hearing Loss Is Common but Is

Amenable to Treatment Highlights

H

uman experience is enriched by the ability

to distinguish a remarkable range of sounds—

from the intimacy of a whisper to the warmth

of a conversation, from the complexity of a symphony to the roar of a stadium. Hearing begins when the sensory cells of the cochlea, the receptor organ of the inner ear, transduce sound energy into electrical signals and forward them to the brain. Our ability to recognize small differences in sounds stems from the cochlea's capacity to distinguish among frequency components, their amplitudes, and their relative timing. Hearing depends on the remarkable properties of hair cells, the cellular microphones of the inner ear. Hair cells transduce mechanical vibrations elicited by

-

sounds into electrical signals, which are then relayed to the brain for interpretation. The hair cells can measure motions of atomic dimensions and transduce stim uli ranging from static inputs to those at frequencies of tens of kilohertz. Remarkably, hair cells can also serve as mechanical amplifiers that augment auditory sensitivity. Each of the paired cochleae contains approximately 16,000 of these cells. Deterioration of hair cells and their innervation accounts for most of the hearing loss that afflicts about 10% of the population in industrialized countries.

10/12/20 3:29 PM

The Ear Has Three Functional Parts

Sound consists of alternating compressions and rarefac-

## tions propagated by an elastic medium, the air, at a

speed of approximately 340 m/s. This wave of pressure

changes carries mechanical energy that stems from the work produced on air by our vocal apparatus or some other sound source. The mechanical energy is captured and transmitted to the receptor organ, where it is transduced into electrical signals suitable for neural analysis. These three tasks are associated with the external ear, the middle ear, and the cochlea of the inner ear, respectively (Figure 26–1). The most obvious component of the human external ear is the auricle, a prominent fold of cartilagesupported skin. The auricle acts as a reflector to capture

sound efficiently and focus it into the external auditory meatus, or ear canal. The ear canal ends at the tympanum, or eardrum, a diaphragm approximately 9 mm in diameter and 50 μm in thickness. The external ear is not uniformly effective at capturing sound from all directions; the auricle's corrugated surface collects sounds best when they originate at dif-

ferent, but specific, positions with respect to the head. Our capacity to localize sounds in space, especially along the vertical axis, depends critically on these sound-gathering properties. Each auricle has a unique topography; its effect on sound reflections at different frequencies is learned by the brain early in life.

Figure 26–1 The structure of the human ear.  The exter-

nal ear, especially the prominent auricle, focuses sound

into the external auditory meatus. Alternating increases

and decreases in air pressure vibrate the tympanum. These vibrations are conveyed across the air-filled middle ear by three tiny, linked bones: the malleus, the incus, and the stapes. Vibration of the stapes stimulates the cochlea, the hearing organ of the inner ear.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 599

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


The middle ear is an air-filled pouch connected to

the pharynx by the Eustachian tube. Airborne sound

traverses the middle ear as vibrations of the auditory

ossicles, three tiny bones that are linked together: the malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes (stirrup; Figure 26–1). A long extension of the malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane; its other extreme makes a ligamentous connection to the incus, which is similarly connected to the stapes. The flattened base of the stapes, the footplate, is seated in an opening— the oval window—in the bony covering of the cochlea. The auditory ossicles are relics of evolution. The stapes was originally a component of the gill support of ancient fish; the malleus and incus were components of the primary jaw joint in reptilian ancestors. The inner ear includes the auditory sensory organ, the cochlea (Greek cochlos, snail), a coiled structure of progressively diminishing diameter wound around a

conical bony core (Figure 26–1). In humans, the cochlea is approximately 9 mm across, the size of a chickpea, and is embedded within the temporal bone. The interior of the cochlea consists of three parallel liquid-filled compartments termed scalae. In a cross section of the cochlea at any position along its spiral course, the top compartment is the scala vestibuli (Figure 26–2). At the broad, basal end of this chamber is the oval window, the opening that is sealed by the footplate of the stapes. The bottom compartment is the scala tympani; it too has a basal aperture, the round window, which is closed by

Auricle Vestibular Cochlear nerve Cochlea

<!-- image -->

10/12/20 3:29 PM


Part IV / Perception

Semicircular Anterior vertical Posterior

<!-- image -->

Figure 26–2 The structure of the cochlea. A cross sec-

tion of the cochlea shows the arrangement of the three

liquid-filled ducts or scalae, each of which is approximately

33 mm long. The scala vestibuli and scala tympani communicate through the helicotrema at the apex of the cochlea. At the base, each duct is closed by a sealed aperture. The scala vestibuli is closed by the oval window, against which the stapes pushes in response to sound; the scala tympani a thin, elastic diaphragm beyond which lies the air of

the middle-ear cavity. The two chambers are separated

along most of their length by the cochlear partition but

communicate with one another at the very tip of the cochlea, through the helicotrema. The cochlear partition contains the third liquidfilled cavity, the scala media, and is delimited by two membranes. The thin Reissner's, or vestibular, mem-

brane divides the scala media from the scala vestibuli. The basilar membrane separates the cochlear partition from the scala tympani and supports the complex

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 600

Cochlear nerve

Scala vestibuli

Scala media

Organ of Corti

Scala tympani

is closed by the round window, a thin, flexible membrane.

Between these two compartments lies the scala media,

an endolymph-filled tube whose epithelial lining includes

the 16,000 hair cells in the organ of Corti surmounting the basilar membrane (blue). The hair cells are covered by the tectorial membrane (green). The cross section in the lower diagram has been rotated so that the cochlear apex is oriented toward the top. sensory structure involved in auditory transduction,

the organ of Corti (Figure 26–2).

Hearing Commences With the Capture of

Sound Energy by the Ear

## Psychophysical experiments have established that we perceive an approximately equal increment in loud-

ness for each 10-fold increase in the magnitude of a

sound stimulus. This type of relation is characteristic

10/12/20 3:29 PM

Utricle Vestibular nerve of many of our senses and is the basis of the Weber- Fechner law (Chapter 17). A logarithmic scale is therefore useful in relating the magnitude of sound pressure to perceived loudness. Sound pressure corresponds to the sound-evoked modulation of the air pressure with respect to the mean atmospheric pressure; the louder the sound, the larger is the modulation. The sound-pressure level, L, of any sound may be expressed in decibels (dB) as L = 20 · log 10 (P / P REF ), Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


malleus and the incus, the incus in humans being only

about 70% of the length of the malleus.

The action of the stapes produces pressure

changes that propagate through the liquid of the scala vestibuli at the speed of sound in water. Because liq-

in which P, the magnitude of the stimulus, is the

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

cals, abbreviated Pa, or newtons per square meter).

For a sinusoidal stimulus, the amplitude exceeds the root-mean-square value by a factor of √2. The arbi trary reference level on this scale, 0 dB sound-pressure level (SPL), corresponds to a root-mean-square sound pressure, P REF, F, of 20 μPa. This level represents the approximate threshold of human hearing at 1 to 4 kHz, the frequency range in which our ears are most sensitive. Sound consists of very small alternating changes in the local air pressure. The loudest sound tolerable to humans, approximately 120 dB SPL, transiently alters

-uids are virtually incompressible, however, the primary effect of the stapes's motion is to displace the liquid in the scala vestibuli in the one direction that is not restricted by a rigid boundary: toward the elastic cochlear partition (Figure 26–3B). The deflection of the cochlear partition downward increases the pressure in the scala tympani, displacing a liquid mass that causes outward bowing of the round window. Each cycle of a sound stimulus thus evokes a cycle of up-and-down movement of a minuscule volume of liquid in each of the cochlea's three chambers, thus displacing the sensory organ. By increasing the magnitude of pressure changes by up to 30-fold, the overall effect of the middle ear is to match the low impedance of the air outside the

the local atmospheric pressure by only ±0.01%. In contrast, a sound at the threshold level causes a change in the local pressure of much less than one part in a billion. From the faintest sounds that can be detected to sounds so intense that they hurt, the sound pressure increases by one millionfold, which correspond to a trillionfold range in stimulus power. The dynamic range of hearing is enormous. Despite their small magnitude, sound-induced increases and decreases in air pressure move the tympanum inward and outward (Figure 26–3A,B). Near ear to the higher impedance of the cochlear partition, thus ensuring the efficient transfer of sound energy from the first medium to the second. The pressure gain afforded by the middle ear depends on sound frequency, which determines the U-shape tuning curve of auditory threshold. Changes of the middle ear's normal structure that reduce its displacement amplitudes can lead to conductive hearing loss, of which two forms are espe-

threshold, the amplitude of vibration is in the picometer range, which is comparable to the tympanum's own thermal fluctuations. Even loud sounds elicit vibrations of the tympanum that do not exceed 1 μm in amplitude. The resulting motions of the ossicles are essentially like those of two interconnected levers (the malleus and incus) and a piston (the stapes). The vibration of the incus alternately drives the stapes deeper into the oval window and retracts it, like a piston that pushes and pulls cyclically upon the liquid in the scala vestibuli. In humans, the area of the eardrum is about 20-fold larger than that of the stapes footplate. As a result, pressure changes applied on the liquid of scala vestibuli by the stapes footplate are larger than those pushing and pulling the tympanum. Pressures are further magnified by the lever operating between the

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 601

cially common. First, scar tissue caused by middle-ear infection (otitis media) can immobilize the tympanum or ossicles. Second, a proliferation of bone in the ligamentous attachments of the ossicles can reduce their normal freedom of motion. This chronic condition of unknown origin, termed otosclerosis, can lead to severe deafness. A clinician may test for conductive hearing loss by the simple Rinné test. A patient is asked to assess the loudness of a vibrating tuning fork under two condi-

tions: when the tuning fork is held in the air or when it is pressed against the head just behind the ear. For the second stimulus, sound is conducted through bone to the cochlea. If the second stimulus is perceived to be louder, the patient's conductive pathway through the middle ear may be damaged, but the inner ear is likely to be intact. In contrast, if bone conduction is not more efficient than airborne stimulation, the patient may have inner-ear damage, that is, sensorineural hearing loss. The diagnosis of conductive hearing loss is important, because surgical intervention can be highly effective: Removal of scar tissue or reconstitution of the conductive pathway with a prosthesis may restore excellent hearing.

10/12/20 3:29 PM


Part IV / Perception

A

Helicotrema

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 602

Scala

media

500 µm

10/12/20 3:29 PM

The Hydrodynamic and Mechanical Apparatus

of the Cochlea Delivers Mechanical Stimuli to

the Receptor Cells

## The Basilar Membrane Is a Mechanical Analyzer of Sound Frequency

## The continuous variation of the mechanical properties of the basilar membrane along the cochlea's length,

approximately 33 mm, is key to the cochlea's opera-

tion. The basilar membrane at the base of the human cochlea is less than one-fifth as broad as at the apex. Thus, although the cochlear chambers become progressively smaller from the organ's base toward its apex, the basilar membrane increases in width (Figure 26–3C). Moreover, the basilar membrane is relatively thick toward the base of the cochlea but thinner at the apex. Both morphological gradients contribute to a base-to-apex decrease in basilar-membrane stiffness. Radial collagen fibers within the membrane determine most of its elasticity. The basilar membrane may schematically be regarded as a set of weakly coupled radial segments of increasing length along the longitudinal axis of the cochlea, with the shortest segment at the base and the longest segment at the apex, analogous to the multiple strings of a piano.

Figure 26–3 (Opposite) Motion of the basilar membrane.

A. An uncoiled cochlea, with its base displaced to show its

relation to the scalae, indicates the flow of stimulus energy.

## Sound vibrates the tympanum, which sets the three ossicles of

the middle ear in motion. The piston-like action of the stapes, a bone inserted partially into the elastic oval window, produces oscillatory pressure differences that rapidly propagate along the scala vestibuli and scala tympani. Low-frequency pressure differences are shunted through the helicotrema, where the two ducts communicate. B. The functional properties of the cochlea are conceptually simplified if the cochlea is viewed as a linear structure with only two liquid-filled compartments separated by the elastic basilar

membrane.

C. The basilar membrane, here represented in a surface view, increases in width from approximately 50 μm near the base to 500 μm near the apex of the cochlea. Radial collagen fibers run

from the neural to the abneural edge of the membrane. As the result of its morphological gradients, the basilar membrane's mechanical properties vary continuously along its length. D. The oscillatory stimulation of a sound causes a traveling wave on the basilar membrane, shown here within the envelope of maximal displacement over an entire cycle. The

magnitude of movement is grossly exaggerated in the vertical direction; the loudest tolerable sounds move the basilar membrane by only ±150 nm, a scaled distance less than onehundredth the width of the lines representing the basilar membrane in these figures.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 603

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


Stimulation with a pure tone evokes a complex

and elegant movement of the basilar membrane. Over

one complete cycle of a tone, each affected segment

along the basilar membrane undergoes a single cycle of vibration (Figure 26–3D,E). The various segments of the membrane do not, however, oscillate in phase with one another. As first demonstrated by Georg von Békésy using stroboscopic illumination, each segment reaches its maximal amplitude of motion slightly later than its basal neighbor. The normalized sinusoidal movement of the basilar membrane reproduces that of the stapes, but with a time delay that increases with the distance from the cochlear base. The overall pattern of motion of the membrane is that of a traveling wave that traverses the cochlea from the stiff base toward the floppier apex. As each wave

advances toward the apex, the amplitude of vibration grows to a maximum and then declines rapidly. The position at which the traveling wave reaches its maximal amplitude depends on sound frequency. The basilar membrane at the base of the cochlea responds best to the highest audible frequencies—in humans approximately 20 kHz. At the cochlear apex, the membrane responds to frequencies as low as 20 Hz. The intervening frequencies are represented along the basilar

E. An enlargement of the active region in D demonstrates

the motion of the basilar membrane in response to stimu-

lation with sound of a single frequency. The continuous

curve depicts a traveling wave at one instant; the vertical scale of basilar-membrane deflection is exaggerated about one-millionfold. The dashed and dotted curves portray the traveling wave at successively later times as it progresses from the cochlear base (left) toward the apex (right). As the wave approaches the characteristic place for the stimulus frequency, it slows and grows in amplitude. The stimulus energy is then transferred to hair cells at positions within the wave's peak. F. Each frequency of stimulation excites maximal motion at a particular position along the basilar membrane. Low-frequency sounds produce basilar-membrane motion near the apex,

where the membrane is relatively broad and soft. Mid-frequency sounds excite the membrane in its middle. The highest frequencies that we can hear excite the basilar membrane at its narrow, stiff base. The mapping of sound frequency onto the basilar membrane is approximately logarithmic. G. The basilar membrane performs spectral analysis of complex sounds. In this example, a sound with three prominent frequencies, such as the three formants of a vowel sound, excites

basilar-membrane motion in three regions, each of which represents a particular frequency. Hair cells in the corresponding positions transduce the basilar-membrane oscillations into receptor potentials, which in turn excite the nerve fibers that innervate these particular regions.

10/12/20 3:29 PM


Part IV / Perception

membrane in a continuous array (Figure 26–3F). In the

19th century, the German physiologist Hermann von

Helmholtz was the first to appreciate that the basi-

lar membrane's operation is essentially the inverse of a piano's. The piano synthesizes a complex sound by combining the pure tones produced by numerous vibrating strings; the cochlea, by contrast, deconstructs a complex sound by isolating the component tones at the appropriate segments of the basilar membrane. For any frequency within the auditory range, there is a characteristic place along the basilar membrane at which the magnitude of vibration is maximal.

Although the morphological gradients of the basilar membrane are key to the process, the actual dispersion of a sound's frequency components along the cochlea's longitudinal axis depends on the mechanical properties of the cochlear partition as a whole. In particular, as we shall detail later, the hair cells within the organ of Corti provide active mechanical feedback that sharpens mechanical tuning of the basilar membrane and enhances its sensitivity to sound. The arrangement of vibration frequencies along the basilar membrane is an example of a tonotopic map. The relationship between frequency and position along the basilar membrane varies monotonically, but is not linear; the logarithm of the frequency decreases roughly in proportion to the distance from the cochlea's base. The frequencies from 20 kHz to 2 kHz, those between 2 kHz and 200 Hz, and those spanning 200 Hz to 20 Hz are each represented by approximately one-third of the basilar membrane's extent. Analysis of the response to a complex sound illustrates how the basilar membrane operates in daily life. A vowel sound in human speech, for example, ordinar-

ily comprises three dominant frequency components termed formants. Each frequency component of the stimulus establishes a traveling wave that, to a first approximation, is independent of the waves evoked by the others (Figure 26–3G) and reaches its peak excursion at a point on the basilar membrane appropriate for that frequency component. The basilar membrane thus acts as a mechanical frequency analyzer by distributing the energies associated with the different frequency components of the stimulus to hair cells arrayed along its length. In doing so, the basilar membrane begins the encoding of the frequencies in a sound. The Organ of Corti Is the Site of Mechanoelectrical Transduction in the Cochlea

## The organ of Corti, a ridge of epithelium extending along the basilar membrane, is the receptor organ of the inner ear. Each organ of Corti contains approximately

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 604

16,000 hair cells that are innervated by approximately

30,000 afferent nerve fibers; these are fibers that carry

information into the brain along the eighth cranial

nerve. Like the basilar membrane itself, each hair cell is most sensitive to a particular frequency, and these frequencies are logarithmically mapped in descending order from the cochlea's base to its apex. Thus, the information transmitted by these sensory cells to their innervating nerve fibers is also tonotopically organized. The organ of Corti includes a variety of cells, some of unknown function, but four types have obvious importance. First, there are two types of hair cells. The

inner hair cells form a single row of approximately 3,500 cells, whereas approximately 12,000 outer hair cells lie in three rows farther from the central axis of the coch -lear spiral (Figure 26–4). The space between the inner and outer hair cells is delimited and mechanically supported by pillar cells. The outer hair cells are supported at their bases by Deiters's (phalangeal) cells. A second epithelial ridge adjacent to the organ of Corti, but nearer the cochlea's central axis, gives rise to the tectorial membrane, a gelatinous shelf that

covers the organ of Corti (Figure 26–4). The tectorial membrane is anchored at its base, and its tapered distal edge forms a fragile connection with the organ of Corti. Hair cells are not neurons; they lack both dendrites and axons (Figure 26–5A). A special saline solution, the endolymph that fills scala media, bathes the cell's

apical aspect. Tight junctions between hair cells and supporting cells separate this liquid from the standard extracellular fluid, or perilymph, that contacts the basolateral surface of the cell. Immediately below the tight junctions, a desmosomal junction provides a strong mechanical attachment for the hair cell to its neighbors. The hair bundle, which serves as a receptive antenna for mechanical stimuli, projects from the flattened apical surface of the hair cell. Each bundle comprises a few

tens to a few hundred cylindrical processes, the stereocilia, arranged in 2 to 10 parallel rows and extending several micrometers from the cell surface. Successive stereocilia across a cell's surface vary monotonically in height; a hair bundle is beveled like the tip of a hypodermic needle (Figure 26–5B). The inner hair-cell bundles of the mammalian cochlea, when viewed from above, have a roughly linear form. Outer hair-cell bundles, in contrast, have a V or W shape (Figure 26–6). Each stereocilium is a rigid cylinder whose core consists of a fascicle of actin filaments that are heav -ily cross-linked by the proteins plastin (fimbrin), fas-

cin, and epsin. Cross-linking renders a stereocilium

10/12/20 3:29 PM
Part IV / Perception

membrane in a continuous array (Figure 26–3F). In the

19th century, the German physiologist Hermann von

Helmholtz was the first to appreciate that the basi-

lar membrane's operation is essentially the inverse of a piano's. The piano synthesizes a complex sound by combining the pure tones produced by numerous vibrating strings; the cochlea, by contrast, deconstructs a complex sound by isolating the component tones at the appropriate segments of the basilar membrane. For any frequency within the auditory range, there is a characteristic place along the basilar membrane at which the magnitude of vibration is maximal.

Although the morphological gradients of the basilar membrane are key to the process, the actual dispersion of a sound's frequency components along the cochlea's longitudinal axis depends on the mechanical properties of the cochlear partition as a whole. In particular, as we shall detail later, the hair cells within the organ of Corti provide active mechanical feedback that sharpens mechanical tuning of the basilar membrane and enhances its sensitivity to sound. The arrangement of vibration frequencies along the basilar membrane is an example of a tonotopic map. The relationship between frequency and position along the basilar membrane varies monotonically, but is not linear; the logarithm of the frequency decreases roughly in proportion to the distance from the cochlea's base. The frequencies from 20 kHz to 2 kHz, those between 2 kHz and 200 Hz, and those spanning 200 Hz to 20 Hz are each represented by approximately one-third of the basilar membrane's extent. Analysis of the response to a complex sound illustrates how the basilar membrane operates in daily life. A vowel sound in human speech, for example, ordinar-

ily comprises three dominant frequency components termed formants. Each frequency component of the stimulus establishes a traveling wave that, to a first approximation, is independent of the waves evoked by the others (Figure 26–3G) and reaches its peak excursion at a point on the basilar membrane appropriate for that frequency component. The basilar membrane thus acts as a mechanical frequency analyzer by distributing the energies associated with the different frequency components of the stimulus to hair cells arrayed along its length. In doing so, the basilar membrane begins the encoding of the frequencies in a sound. The Organ of Corti Is the Site of Mechanoelectrical Transduction in the Cochlea

## The organ of Corti, a ridge of epithelium extending along the basilar membrane, is the receptor organ of the inner ear. Each organ of Corti contains approximately

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 604

16,000 hair cells that are innervated by approximately

30,000 afferent nerve fibers; these are fibers that carry

information into the brain along the eighth cranial

nerve. Like the basilar membrane itself, each hair cell is most sensitive to a particular frequency, and these frequencies are logarithmically mapped in descending order from the cochlea's base to its apex. Thus, the information transmitted by these sensory cells to their innervating nerve fibers is also tonotopically organized. The organ of Corti includes a variety of cells, some of unknown function, but four types have obvious importance. First, there are two types of hair cells. The

inner hair cells form a single row of approximately 3,500 cells, whereas approximately 12,000 outer hair cells lie in three rows farther from the central axis of the coch -lear spiral (Figure 26–4). The space between the inner and outer hair cells is delimited and mechanically supported by pillar cells. The outer hair cells are supported at their bases by Deiters's (phalangeal) cells. A second epithelial ridge adjacent to the organ of Corti, but nearer the cochlea's central axis, gives rise to the tectorial membrane, a gelatinous shelf that

covers the organ of Corti (Figure 26–4). The tectorial membrane is anchored at its base, and its tapered distal edge forms a fragile connection with the organ of Corti. Hair cells are not neurons; they lack both dendrites and axons (Figure 26–5A). A special saline solution, the endolymph that fills scala media, bathes the cell's

apical aspect. Tight junctions between hair cells and supporting cells separate this liquid from the standard extracellular fluid, or perilymph, that contacts the basolateral surface of the cell. Immediately below the tight junctions, a desmosomal junction provides a strong mechanical attachment for the hair cell to its neighbors. The hair bundle, which serves as a receptive antenna for mechanical stimuli, projects from the flattened apical surface of the hair cell. Each bundle comprises a few

tens to a few hundred cylindrical processes, the stereocilia, arranged in 2 to 10 parallel rows and extending several micrometers from the cell surface. Successive stereocilia across a cell's surface vary monotonically in height; a hair bundle is beveled like the tip of a hypodermic needle (Figure 26–5B). The inner hair-cell bundles of the mammalian cochlea, when viewed from above, have a roughly linear form. Outer hair-cell bundles, in contrast, have a V or W shape (Figure 26–6). Each stereocilium is a rigid cylinder whose core consists of a fascicle of actin filaments that are heav -ily cross-linked by the proteins plastin (fimbrin), fas-

cin, and epsin. Cross-linking renders a stereocilium

10/12/20 3:29 PM

Figure 26–4 Cellular architecture of the

human organ of Corti. Although there are

differences among species, the basic plan

is similar for all mammals. A. The organ of Corti, the inner ear's receptor organ, is an epithelial strip that surmounts the elastic basilar membrane.

- The organ contains some 16,000 hair cells arrayed in four rows: a single row of inner hair cells and three rows of outer hair cells. The mechanically sensitive hair bundles of these receptor cells protrude into endolymph, the liquid within the scala media. Reissner's membrane, which provides the upper boundary of the scala media, separates the endolymph from the perilymph in the scala vestibuli. The hair bundles of outer hair cells are attached at their tops to the lower surface of the tectorial mem -brane, a gelatinous shelf that extends the full length of the basilar membrane. B. The hair cells are separated and supported by pillar cells and Deiters's cells. One hair cell has been removed from the

middle row of outer hair cells to reveal the

- three-dimensional relationship between supporting cells and hair cells. Afferent and efferent nerve endings are colored in red and green, respectively.

much more rigid than would be expected for a bundle Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea Bony wall of cochlea vascularis Tectorial membrane Organ of Corti Outer Basilar membrane beneath the apical cell membrane. Because of this

<!-- image -->

of unconnected actin filaments. The actin core of the

stereocilium is covered by a tubular sheath of plasma tapered structure, a mechanical force applied at the tip causes the stereocilium to pivot around its basal inser-

--tion. Horizontal top connectors interconnect adjacent stereocilia near their tips. These extracellular filaments restrict the bundle to move as a unit during stimulation at low frequencies. At high frequencies, the viscosity of the liquid between the stereocilia also opposes their separation and thus ensures the unitary motion of the hair bundle.

10/12/20 3:29 PM

membrane. Although a stereocilium is of constant diameter along most of its length, it tapers just above its basal insertion (see Figure 25–5B). Correspondingly, the number of actin filaments diminishes from sev eral hundred to only a few dozen. This thin cluster of microfilaments anchors the stereocilium in the cuticu lar plate, a thick mesh of interlinked actin filaments

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 605

A



Part IV / Perception

A

Stereocilia Kinocilium Basal body Tight junction Belt desmosome Nucleus Supporting Basal lamina

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 606

During its early development, every hair bundle

includes at its tall edge a single true cilium, the

kinocilium (Figure 26–5). Like other cilia, this structure

possesses at its core an axoneme, or array of nine paired microtubules, and often an additional central pair of microtubules. The kinocilium is not essential for mecha -noelectrical transduction, for in mammalian cochlear hair cells, it degenerates around the time of birth. Hair Cells Transform Mechanical Energy Into

Neural Signals

## Deflection of the Hair Bundle Initiates Mechanoelectrical Transduction

## Just as in vestibular organs (Chapter 27), mechanical deflection of the hair bundle is the stimulus that

excites hair cells of the cochlea. Stimuli elicit an elec

-

trical response, the receptor potential, by opening or closing—a process termed "gating"—mechanically sensitive ion channels. The hair cell's response depends on the direction and magnitude of the stimulus. In an unstimulated cell, 10% to 50% of the channels involved in stimulus transduction are open. As a result, the cell's resting potential, which lies within a

range of approximately –70 to –30 mV, is determined in part by the influx of cations through these channels. A stimulus that displaces the bundle toward its tall edge opens additional channels, thereby depolarizing the cell (Figure 26–7). In contrast, a stimulus that displaces the bundle toward its short edge shuts transduction channels that are open at rest, thus hyperpolarizing

Figure 26–5 (Left) Structure of a vertebrate hair cell

.

A. The epithelial character of the hair cell is evident in this

drawing of the sensory epithelium from a frog's internal ear.

The cylindrical hair cell is joined to adjacent supporting cells

by a junctional complex around its apex. The hair bundle, a mechanically sensitive organelle, extends from the cell's apical surface. The bundle comprises some 60 stereocilia arranged in stepped rows of varying length. At the bundle's tall edge stands the single kinocilium, an axonemal structure with a bulbous swelling at its tip; in the mammalian cochlea, this organelle degenerates around the time of birth. Deflection of the hair bundle's top to the right depolarizes the hair cell; movement in the opposite direction elicits hyperpolarization. The hair cell is surrounded by supporting cells, whose apical surfaces bear a stubble of microvilli. Afferent and efferent synapses contact the basolateral surface of the plasma membrane. B. This scanning electron micrograph of a hair cell's apical surface reveals the hair bundle protruding approximately 8 μm into the endolymph. (Image reproduced, with permission, from A.J.

Hudspeth.)

10/12/20 3:29 PM

A

Inner hair cells Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea Outer hair cells are visible: from left to right, inner spiral sulcus cells, pillar cells,

<!-- image -->

Keele University, United Kingdom.)

A. Inner hair cells form a single row, and the stereocilia of each cell are arranged linearly. In contrast, outer hair cells are distributed in three rows, and the stereocilia of each cell are arranged

in a V configuration. The apical surfaces of several other cells

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 607

B. Higher magnification shows the linear configuration of

the hair bundle atop an inner hair cell (left) and the V con-

figuration of an outer hair-cell bundle (right), as well as the arrangement of the stereocilia in rows of increasing

heights.


10/12/20 3:30 PM


Part IV / Perception

the cell. Hair cells respond most to stimuli parallel to

the hair bundle's axis of morphological mirror sym-

metry: Stimuli at right angles to the axis produce little

change from the resting potential. An oblique stimulus elicits a response proportional to its vectorial projection along the axis of sensitivity.

A

A hair cell's receptor potential is graded. As the

stimulus amplitude increases, the receptor potential

grows progressively larger up to the point of satura-

tion. The receptor potential of an inner hair cell can be as great as 25 mV in peak-to-peak magnitude. The relation between a bundle's deflection and the resulting electrical response is sigmoidal (Figure 26–7D). A displacement of only ±100 nm represents approximately 90% of the response range. During normal stimulation, a hair bundle moves through an angle of ±1° or so, that is, by much less than the diameter of one stereocilium. When observed in vitro, a hair bundle exhibits Brownian motion of approximately ±3 nm, whereas the threshold of hearing corresponds to basilar-

Force membrane movements of as little as ±0.3 nm. There are at least three mechanisms that explain how the hair bundle may respond to motion smaller than its own noise. First, because the cochlear partition does not move as a rigid body, the movement of the hair bundle is larger than that of the basilar membrane. Second, frequency-selective amplification of low stimuli actively pulls the signal out of the noise. Finally, mechanical coupling to a group of neighbors results in synchronization that effectively reduces noise. At hearing threshold, a stimulus evokes a receptor potential near 100 μV in amplitude. The ion channels in hair cells that mediate mecha -noelectrical transduction are relatively nonselective, cation-passing pores with a conductance near 100 pS.

Figure 26–7 (Left) Mechanical sensitivity of a hair cell. From the known size of small organic cations and fluorescent molecules that can traverse the channel, the transduction channel's pore must be about 1.3 nm in diameter. Most of the transduction current is car -ried by K + , the cation with the highest concentration in the endolymph bathing the hair bundle. Although

A. A recording electrode is inserted into a frog hair cell.

B. A probe attached to the bulbous tip of the stereocilium is

moved by a piezoelectric stimulator, deflecting the elastic hair

bundle from its resting position. The actual deflections are gen-

erally only one-tenth as large as those portrayed. C. When the top of a hair bundle is displaced back and forth (upper trace), the opening and closing of mechanically sensitive ion channels produce an oscillatory receptor potential

(lower trace) that—as here—may saturate in both the depolarizing and the hyperpolarizing directions. D. The relation between hair-bundle deflection (abscissa) and receptor potential (ordinate) is sigmoidal. The entire operating range is only approximately 100 nm, less than the diameter

of an individual stereocilium. At rest, the hair bundle operates within the steep region of the sigmoid, which ensures significant receptor potentials in response to weak stimuli.

Tip link

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 608

+200 nm

10/12/20 3:30 PM

endolymph is relatively poor in Ca

2+

, a small fraction

of the transduction current is carried by this ion. Flu-

orescent indicators indicate that Ca

2+

entry, and thus

mechanoelectrical transduction, occurs precisely at the stereociliary tips of a deflected hair bundle. Singlechannel recordings, together with the observation that the magnitude of the transduction current is roughly proportional to the number of functional stereocilia remaining in a microdissected bundle, indicate that there are probably only two active transduction channels per stereocilium. The large diameter and poor selectivity of the pore permit transduction channels to be blocked by aminoglycoside antibiotics such as streptomycin, gen-

tamicin, and tobramycin. When used in large doses to counter bacterial infections, these drugs have a toxic effect on hair cells; the antibiotics damage hair bundles and eventually kill hair cells. These drugs pass through transduction channels at a low rate and thus cause long-term toxic effects by interfering with protein synthesis on the mitochondrial ribosomes, which resemble bacterial ribosomes. Consistent with this hypothesis, human sensitivity to aminoglycosides is maternally inherited, as are the mitochondria, and in many instances reflects a single base change in the 12S ribosomal RNA gene of the mitochondrion. Mechanical Force Directly Opens Transduction Channels

## The mechanism for gating of transduction channels in hair cells differs fundamentally from the mechanisms

used for electrical signals in neurons such as the action

potential or postsynaptic potential. Many ion channels respond to changes in membrane potential or to specific ligands (Chapters 8, 10, and 12–14). In contrast, two lines of evidence suggest that the mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the hair cell are activated by mechanical strain. First, a bundle is stiffer along its axis of mechanical sensitivity than at a right angle. This observation suggests that a portion of the work done in deflecting a Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


A second indication that transduction channels

are directly controlled by gating springs is the rapidity

with which hair cells respond. The response latency is

so brief, only a few microseconds, that gating is more likely to be direct than to involve a second messenger (Chapter 14). Moreover, the electrical responses of hair cells to a series of step stimuli of increasing magnitude become both larger and faster. This behavior favors a kinetic scheme in which mechanical force controls the rate constant for channel gating. The tip link is a probable component of the gating spring. A tip link is a fine molecular braid joining the distal end of one stereocilium to the side of the long-

est adjacent process (Figure 26–8A). Deflection of a hair bundle toward its tall edge tenses the tip link and promotes channel opening; movement in the opposite direction slackens the link and allows the associated channels to close (Figure 26–8B). Three experimental results suggest that the tip links are components of the gating springs. First, tip links are universal features of hair bundles and are situated at

the site of transduction. The transduction channels are indeed located at the stereociliary tips, thus near the lower insertion point of the tip link. Second, the orientation of the links is consistent with the vectorial sensitivity of transduction. The links invariably interconnect stereocilia in a direction parallel with the hair bundle's axis of mechanosensitivity. Finally, when tip links are disrupted by exposing hair cells to Ca 2+ chela -tors, transduction vanishes. As the tip links regenerate over the course of approximately 12 hours, a hair cell regains mechanosensitivity. It remains unclear whether the elasticity of gating springs resides primarily in the tip links or in the structures at their two insertions. In the mammalian cochlea, hair bundles are deflected through their linkage to the tectorial membrane. When the basilar membrane oscillates up

-and down in response to a sound, the organ of Corti and the overlying tectorial membrane move with it. Because the basilar and tectorial membranes pivot about different lines of insertion, however, their upand-down motion is accompanied by a back-andforth shearing motion between the upper surface of the organ of Corti and the lower surface of the tectorial membrane. This is the motion that is detected by hair cells (Figure 26–9). The hair bundles of outer hair cells, whose tips are firmly attached to the tectorial membrane, are directly deflected by this movement. The hair bundles of inner

hair cells, which do not contact the tectorial membrane, are deflected by movement of the liquid beneath the membrane. This mode of stimulation affords some mechanical magnification of the signals reaching hair

10/12/20 3:30 PM

bundle goes into elastic elements, termed gating springs, which pull on the molecular gates of the transduction channels. Because the gating springs contribute over half of a hair bundle's stiffness, the transduction chan nels efficiently capture the energy supplied when a bundle is deflected. In addition, the mechanical properties of a hair bundle vary during channel gating: When channels open or close, stiffness decreases and friction increases. Both phenomena are expected if the channels are gated directly through a mechanical linkage to the hair bundle.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 609


Part IV / Perception

Figure 26–8 Mechanoelectrical trans-

duction by hair cells.

A. A tip link connects each stereocilium to

## the side of the longest adjacent stereocilium, as seen in a scanning electron micro-

graph (left) and a transmission electron micrograph (right) of a hair bundle's top surface. Each tip link is only 3 nm in diameter and 150 to 200 nm in length. The links appear stouter in the illustration on the left because of metallic coating during specimen preparation. (Reproduced, with permission, from Assad, Shepherd, and Corey 1991; reproduced, with permission, from Hudspeth and Gillespie 1994.) B. Top: Ion flux through the channel that underlies mechanoelectrical transduction in hair cells is regulated by a molecular

A

<!-- image -->

gate. The opening and closing of the gate are controlled by the tension in an elastic element, the gating spring, which senses hair-bundle displacement. (Adapted, with permission, from Howard and Hudspeth 1988.) Bottom: When the hair bundle is at rest, each transduction channel fluctuates between closed and open states, spend-

ing most of its time shut. Displacement of the bundle in the positive direction increases the tension in the gating spring, here assumed to be in part a tip link, attached to each channel's molecular gate. The enhanced tension promotes channel opening and the influx of cations, thereby producing a depolarizing receptor potential. (Adapted, with permission, from Hudspeth 1989.)

bundles. At least for high-frequency stimuli, the move-

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

ments of hair bundles are thought to be severalfold

greater than that of the basilar membrane.

Direct Mechanoelectrical Transduction Is Rapid

Hair cells operate much more quickly than do other

## sensory receptor cells of the vertebrate nervous system

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 610

To deal with the frequencies of biologically relevant

sounds, transduction by hair cells must be rapid.

Given the behavior of sound in air and the dimen -sions of sound-emitting and sound-absorbing organs such as vocal cords and eardrums, optimal auditory communication occurs in the frequency range of 10 Hz to 100 kHz. Much higher frequencies propagate

10/12/20 3:30 PM

A

B


<!-- image -->

in the cochlea are stimulated when the basilar membrane is

driven up and down by differences in the pressure between the Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea

scala vestibuli and scala tympani. This motion is accompanied by shearing movements between the tectorial membrane and organ of Corti. These motions deflect the hair bundles of outer hair cells, which are attached to the lower surface of the tecto rial membrane. The hair bundles of inner hair cells, which are not attached to the tectorial membrane, are deflected by the movement of liquid in the space beneath that structure. In both instances, the deflection initiates mechanoelectrical transduc tion of the stimulus. A. When the basilar membrane is driven upward, shear between the hair cells and the tectorial membrane deflects hair bundles in the excitatory direction, toward their tall edge.


poorly through air; much lower frequencies are inef-

ficiently produced and poorly captured by animals of

moderate size. Even in animals sensitive to relatively

low frequencies, such as frogs, the in vitro transduction current in response to a step stimulus of moderate intensity rises with a time constant of only 80 μs at room temperature. For mammals to be able to respond to frequencies greater than 100 kHz, the hair cells evidently display gating times that are an order of magnitude smaller. Locating sound sources, one of the most important functions of hearing, sets even more stringent limits on the speed of transduction (Chapter 28). A sound from a source directly to one side of a person reaches the nearer ear somewhat sooner than the farther, by at most 700 μs in humans. An observer can locate sound sources on the basis of much smaller delays, about 10 μs. For this to occur, hair cells must be capable of transducing acoustic waveforms with microsecond-level resolution. Deafness Genes Provide Components of the Mechanotransduction Machinery

## Genetic studies of deafness in both humans and mouse models have provided entry points into the molecular

composition of the mechanotransduction machinery of

--the hair cell. In particular, the upper two-thirds of the tip link consist of two parallel molecules of cadherin-23, whereas the lower third comprises two parallel molecules of protocadherin-15 (Figure 26–10). The two components are joined at their tips in a Ca 2+ -sensitive manner; lowering the extracellular Ca 2+ concentration below approximately 1 μM disrupts their association. In humans, mutations in the genes coding for cadherin 23 (USH1D) and protocadherin 15 (USH1F) lead to the most severe form of the Usher syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder that associates severe-to-profound congenital deafness, constant vestibular dysfunction, and retinitis pigmentosa with a prepubertal onset. The study of other genes involved in this type of Usher syndrome has revealed that the upper end of the tip link is anchored to the actin core of a stereocilium by a protein complex that includes the scaffolding proteins sans (USH1G) and harmonin (USH1C), as well as the molecular motor myosin 7a (USH1B). The small number of channels in a hair cell, along with the lack of high-affinity ligands with which to label them, explains why the biochemical identity of

B. At the midpoint of an oscillation, the hair bundles resume their resting position. C. When the basilar membrane moves downward, the hair bun

- dles are driven in the inhibitory direction.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 611

-the transduction channels has long remained uncertain. However, recent genetic, biochemical, and biophysical experiments indicate that four integral transmembrane proteins are intimately related to the transduction channel: transmembrane channel-like proteins 1 and

10/12/20 3:30 PM

Tectorial membrane

Inner Outer

hair cell hair cells Basilar membrane


Part IV / Perception

A

TMIE

Figure 26–10 Molecular composition of the transduction

machinery.

A. The tip link is composed of the heterophilic association of

protocadherin 15 and cadherin 23. Two transduction channels are localized near the lower insertion point of the tip link at

the tip of the shorter stereocilium. Each channel is part of a molecular complex that includes the proteins TMC1/2, LHFPL5, and TMIE. At the upper insertion point on the flank of the longer stereocilium, cadherin 23 interacts with harmonin b and the molecular motor myosin 7a, which both bind to actin and thus anchor the tip link. The protein sans serves as a scaffolding

2 (TMC1 and TMC2), tetraspan membrane protein

in hair-cell stereocilia (TMHS; official nomenclature

LHFPL5), and transmembrane inner-ear-expressed

gene (TMIE; Figure 26–10). Mechanotransduction is abolished in mouse hair cells lacking TMIE, even though all other known components of the transduction machinery appear to be properly in place. However, because TMIE contains only two predicted transmembrane domains, it seems highly unlikely that this protein alone constitutes an ion channel. In the absence of LHFPL5, the conductance of the transduction channel is reduced, but significant transduction currents can still be measured,

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 612

LHFPL5

TMC1/2

protein. In vestibular hair cells, myosin 1c may set the tip link

under tension, but the presence of this motor protein is uncer-

tain in cochlear hair cells.

B. Model of the transduction-channel complex. TMC1/2, LHFPL5, and TMIE interact with protocadherin 15 and, thus, with the lower end of the tip link. TMIE also interacts with LHFPL5. The detailed

arrangement of these proteins within the transduction apparatus is still unknown. Unlike what the figure suggests, TMC1 has been proposed to assemble as a dimer, with each TMC1 molecule contributing a permeation pathway for cations. (Adapted, with permission, from Wu and Müller 2016 and Pan et al. 2018.)

suggesting that this protein is not an essential part

of the channel pore.

Multiple lines of evidence advocate for TMC1 and

TMC2 as components of the transduction channel. Both proteins are localized near the lower insertion

point of the tip link, where the transduction current enters the hair cell, interact with the tip-link constituent protocadherin 15, and their onset of expression coincides with that of mechanoelectrical transduction. In addition, transduction channels in a mouse carrying a single point mutation in the Tmc1 gene show lower conductance and Ca 2+ permeability, indicating that TMC1 is very close to the channel's pore. Individual

10/12/20 3:30 PM

Myosin 7a /1c

Harmonin b

Sans

Actin

lament

<!-- image -->

Protocadherin-15

cysteine substitutions made at sites that are predicted

to be in or near the channel pore confirm that TMC1

belongs to the main conductive pathway. Indeed,

covalent modification of the cysteine residues with a positively charged reagent leads to a reduction of the single-channel conductance in several TMC1 mutants. The cysteine-modifying reagent has no effect when the reagent is applied after the hair bundle has been deflected towards its short edge (to close the transduction channels) or when access to the channel pore is prevented by a channel blocker. TMC1 is thus unlikely to constitute an accessory channel subunit that forms a vestibule to the pore-forming protein(s). Instead, the evidence is strong that TMC1 forms at least part of the pore of the transduction channel. In cochlear hair cells, TMC1 and TMC2 are coexpressed during neonatal development, but only TMC1 expression is maintained through adulthood. Dynamic Feedback Mechanisms Determine the Sensitivity of the Hair Cells

## Hair cells must cope with acoustic stimuli that have a very low energy content. If the stimulus consists of

a periodic signal, such as the sinusoidal pressure of a

pure tone, a detection system can increase the signalto-noise ratio by enhancing selectively the response to a relevant frequency. Hair cells respond best at a characteristic frequency of acoustic stimulation. The frequency selectivity of a given hair cell results in part from passive extrinsic filtering of its mechanical input, in particular as a result of the tonotopic arrangement of the mammalian basilar membrane. In addition, when it is appropriate that low-frequency inputs be disregarded, hair cells possess a unique mechanism of adaptation that acts as a high-pass filter. Hair cells also employ mechanical amplification that enhances and further tunes their mechanosensitivity. Hair Cells Are Tuned to Specific Stimulus Frequencies Every cochlear hair cell is most sensitive to stimula-

## tion at a specific frequency, termed its characteristic, natural, or best frequency. On average, the charac-

teristic frequencies of adjacent inner hair cells differ by approximately 0.2%; adjacent piano strings, in comparison, are tuned to frequencies some 6% apart. Because the traveling wave evoked even by a pure sinusoidal stimulus spreads somewhat along the basilar membrane, the sensitivity of a cochlear hair cell extends within a limited range above and below its characteristic frequency, the more so with a greater level of stimulation. At low levels, a pure tone recruits

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 613

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


approximately 100 hair cells. The frequency sensitiv-

ity of a hair cell may be displayed as a tuning curve.

To construct a tuning curve, an experimenter stimu

-

lates the ear with pure tones at numerous frequencies below, at, and above the cell's characteristic frequency. The level of stimulation is adjusted for each frequency until the cell's response reaches a predefined criterion magnitude. The tuning curve is then a graph of sound level, presented logarithmically in decibels SPL, as a function of stimulus frequency. The tuning curve for an inner hair cell is typically V-shaped (Figure 26–11). The curve's tip represents the cell's characteristic frequency, the frequency that

produces the criterion response for the lowest level of the stimulus. Sounds of greater or lesser frequencies require higher levels to excite the cell to the criterion response. As a consequence of the traveling wave's shape, the slope of a tuning curve is far steeper on its high-frequency flank than on its low-frequency flank. High frequency Low frequency



<!-- image -->


quencies. At each frequency, the stimulus intensity is adjusted

until the cell produces a criterion response, here 1 mV. The curve thus reflects the threshold of the cell for stimulation over a range of frequencies. Each cell is most sensitive to a specific frequency, its characteristic frequency. The threshold rises briskly—the sensitivity falls rapidly—as the stimulus frequency is raised or lowered. The characteristic frequency depends on the position of the hair cell along the longitudinal axis of the cochlea. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kiang 1980. Copyright © 1980 Acoustical Society of America.)

10/12/20 3:30 PM
cysteine substitutions made at sites that are predicted

to be in or near the channel pore confirm that TMC1

belongs to the main conductive pathway. Indeed,

covalent modification of the cysteine residues with a positively charged reagent leads to a reduction of the single-channel conductance in several TMC1 mutants. The cysteine-modifying reagent has no effect when the reagent is applied after the hair bundle has been deflected towards its short edge (to close the transduction channels) or when access to the channel pore is prevented by a channel blocker. TMC1 is thus unlikely to constitute an accessory channel subunit that forms a vestibule to the pore-forming protein(s). Instead, the evidence is strong that TMC1 forms at least part of the pore of the transduction channel. In cochlear hair cells, TMC1 and TMC2 are coexpressed during neonatal development, but only TMC1 expression is maintained through adulthood. Dynamic Feedback Mechanisms Determine the Sensitivity of the Hair Cells

## Hair cells must cope with acoustic stimuli that have a very low energy content. If the stimulus consists of

a periodic signal, such as the sinusoidal pressure of a

pure tone, a detection system can increase the signalto-noise ratio by enhancing selectively the response to a relevant frequency. Hair cells respond best at a characteristic frequency of acoustic stimulation. The frequency selectivity of a given hair cell results in part from passive extrinsic filtering of its mechanical input, in particular as a result of the tonotopic arrangement of the mammalian basilar membrane. In addition, when it is appropriate that low-frequency inputs be disregarded, hair cells possess a unique mechanism of adaptation that acts as a high-pass filter. Hair cells also employ mechanical amplification that enhances and further tunes their mechanosensitivity. Hair Cells Are Tuned to Specific Stimulus Frequencies Every cochlear hair cell is most sensitive to stimula-

## tion at a specific frequency, termed its characteristic, natural, or best frequency. On average, the charac-

teristic frequencies of adjacent inner hair cells differ by approximately 0.2%; adjacent piano strings, in comparison, are tuned to frequencies some 6% apart. Because the traveling wave evoked even by a pure sinusoidal stimulus spreads somewhat along the basilar membrane, the sensitivity of a cochlear hair cell extends within a limited range above and below its characteristic frequency, the more so with a greater level of stimulation. At low levels, a pure tone recruits

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 613

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


approximately 100 hair cells. The frequency sensitiv-

ity of a hair cell may be displayed as a tuning curve.

To construct a tuning curve, an experimenter stimu

-

lates the ear with pure tones at numerous frequencies below, at, and above the cell's characteristic frequency. The level of stimulation is adjusted for each frequency until the cell's response reaches a predefined criterion magnitude. The tuning curve is then a graph of sound level, presented logarithmically in decibels SPL, as a function of stimulus frequency. The tuning curve for an inner hair cell is typically V-shaped (Figure 26–11). The curve's tip represents the cell's characteristic frequency, the frequency that

produces the criterion response for the lowest level of the stimulus. Sounds of greater or lesser frequencies require higher levels to excite the cell to the criterion response. As a consequence of the traveling wave's shape, the slope of a tuning curve is far steeper on its high-frequency flank than on its low-frequency flank. High frequency Low frequency



<!-- image -->


quencies. At each frequency, the stimulus intensity is adjusted

until the cell produces a criterion response, here 1 mV. The curve thus reflects the threshold of the cell for stimulation over a range of frequencies. Each cell is most sensitive to a specific frequency, its characteristic frequency. The threshold rises briskly—the sensitivity falls rapidly—as the stimulus frequency is raised or lowered. The characteristic frequency depends on the position of the hair cell along the longitudinal axis of the cochlea. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kiang 1980. Copyright © 1980 Acoustical Society of America.)

10/12/20 3:30 PM


Part IV / Perception

In the same way as a tuning fork's resonant fre-

quency depends on the size of its tines, the heights of the

hair bundles vary systematically along the tonotopic

axis. Hair cells that respond to low-frequency stimuli have the tallest bundles, whereas those that respond to the highest-frequency signals possess the shortest bundles. In the human cochlea, for example, an inner hair cell with a characteristic frequency of 20 kHz bears a 4-μm hair bundle. At the opposite extreme, a cell sensitive to a 20-Hz stimulus has a bundle more than 7 μm high. A similar morphological gradient is observed with outer hair cells, supplementing the extrinsic tuning accomplished by the basilar membrane. Hair Cells Adapt to Sustained Stimulation

Despite the precision with which a hair bundle grows,

## it cannot develop in such a way that the sensitive

transduction apparatus is always perfectly poised

at its position of greatest mechanosensitivity. Some mechanism must compensate for developmental irregularities, as well as for environmental changes, by adjusting the gating springs so that transduction channels are responsive to weak stimuli at the bundle's resting position. To ensure this, an adaptation process continuously resets the hair bundle's range of mechanical sensitivity. As a result of adaptation, a hair cell can maintain a high sensitivity to transient stimuli while rejecting static inputs a million times as large. Adaptation manifests itself as a progressive decrease in the receptor potential during protracted deflection of the hair bundle (Figure 26–12). The

process is not one of desensitization, for the responsiveness of the receptor persists. Instead, during a prolonged step stimulus, the sigmoidal relationship between the initial receptor potential and the bundle's position shifts in the direction of the applied stimulus. As a result, the membrane potential of the hair cell progressively returns to near its resting value. Adaptation is incomplete, however; the relation between the membrane potential and the bundle position shifts by approximately 80% of the deflected position. How does adaptation occur? Because the mechanical force exerted by a hair bundle changes as adaptation proceeds, the process evidently involves an adjustment

in the tension borne by the gating springs. It appears likely that the structure anchoring the upper end of each tip link, the insertional plaque, is repositioned during adaptation by an active molecular motor (Figure 26–12). The transduction channels are inherently more stable in a closed state, for they close when the tip links are disrupted. A motor is thus also required to maintain a significant fraction (10%–50%) of the transduction

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 614

channels open at rest by continuously pulling on the

gating springs. Several dozen myosin molecules asso-

ciated with the upper end of each tip link are thought

to maintain tension by ascending the actin core of the stereocilium and pulling the link's insertion with them. When a stimulus step increases the tension in a gating spring, the associated transduction channel opens, permitting an influx of cations. As Ca 2+ ions accumu -

late in the stereociliary cytoplasm, they reduce the upward force of the myosin molecules, thereby shortening the gating spring. When the spring reaches its resting tension, closure of the channel reduces the Ca 2+ influx to its original level, restoring a balance between the upward force of myosin and the downward tension in the spring. Hair bundles contain at least five isoforms of myosin, the motor molecule associated with motility along actin filaments (Chapter 31). In vestibular hair

cells, immunohistochemical studies and site-directed mutagenesis implicate myosin 1c in adaptation. In cochlear hair cells, the role of myosin 1c in adaptation has remained elusive. Another motor protein, myosin 7a, is present near the upper insertion point of the tip link and mutations in the corresponding gene (USH1B) are associated with deafness. Hair-cell bundles defective for myosin 7a are disorganized, suggesting that this motor is involved at least in hair-bundle development. If it were only to set the operating point of the transduction apparatus, adaptation could afford to operate on much slower timescales than the period of acous-

tic stimuli. This is the case in response to large deflections of the hair bundle, for which the time constant of adaptation is approximately 20 ms or more when endolymph bathes the hair bundle. This slow adaptation is compatible with the activity of a myosin-based motor driven by the cyclical hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Yet, after being pulled open by an excitatory step stimulus of small magnitude, transduction channels reclose with typical timescales of less than 1 ms and thus short enough to be compatible with auditory frequencies. Current models posit that Ca 2+ ions entering a hair cell through a transduction channel bind to or near the channel's pore, thereby energetically favoring channel closure. The kinetics of this fast adaptation varies systematically along the tonotopic axis of auditory organs, indicating that adaptation may help in setting the hair cell's characteristic frequency of maximal responsiveness. In addition, the reciprocal relationship between channel gating and tip-link tension means that adaptive channel rearrangements evoke internal forces that drive active hair-bundle movements. The mechanical correlate of adaptation

10/12/20 3:30 PM

A

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea

Resting position

<!-- image -->

b

<!-- image -->

positive direction (upper trace) elicits an initial depolarization

+400 nm

B. As adaptation proceeds, the sigmoidal relation between

hair bundle displacement and the receptor potential of the

hair cell shifts to the right along the abscissa, in the direc-

-tion of the new hair-bundle position (dashed line), without substantial changes in the curve's shape or amplitude. The shift explains why the receptor potential decreases over time as shown in A between states b and c, restoring the membrane potential of the hair cell to near its value when there is no stimulus. This result implies that adaptation restores mechanical sensitivity to small rapid deflections of the hair bundle in the presence of a protracted stimulus that would otherwise saturate mechanoelectrical transduction. The four states of the transduction channels shown in A are marked (a–d). (Adapted, with permission, from Hudspeth and Gillespie 1994.)

10/12/20 3:30 PM

followed by a decline to a plateau and an undershoot at the cessation of the stimulus (lower trace). The four schematic hair-cell bundles illustrate the states of the transduction chan nels before (a) and during the illustrated phases of the adaptation (b–d). Initially, the stimulation increases tension in the tip link (second bundle), thus opening transduction channels. As stimulation continues, however, a tip link's upper attachment is thought to slide down the stereocilium, allowing each channel to close during adaptation (third bundle). Prolonged deflection of the hair bundle in the negative direction elicits a complementary response. The cell is slightly hyperpolarized at first but shows a rebound depolarization at the end of stimulation; tension is restored to the initially slack tip link as myosin molecules actively pull up the link's upper insertion.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 615



Part IV / Perception

thus provides feedback that can enhance the stimulus

to the hair cell.

Sound Energy Is Mechanically Amplified in the Cochlea

## The inner ear faces an important obstacle to efficient operation: A large portion of the energy in an acous-

tic stimulus goes into overcoming the damping effects

of cochlear liquids on hair-cell and basilar-membrane motion rather than into excitation of hair cells. The sensitivity of the cochlea is too great, and auditory frequency selectivity too sharp, to result solely from the inner ear's passive mechanical properties. The cochlea must therefore possess some means of actively amplifying sound energy. One indication that amplification occurs in the cochlea comes from measurements of the basilar membrane's movements with sensitive laser inter -

ferometers. In a preparation stimulated with lowlevel sound, the basilar-membrane motion is highly dependent on frequency. The movement is maximal at the appropriate frequency for the position at which the measurement is made—the characteristic fre -quency—but drops abruptly at higher or lower frequencies. As the sound level is increased, however, the frequency selectivity of the vibration becomes less sharp; the peak in the relationship between amplitude and frequency broadens. In addition, the membrane's sensitivity to sound, defined as the vibration amplitude per unit of sound pressure, declines precipitously. When stimulated at the characteristic frequency, the sensitivity of basilar-membrane motion to stimulation at 80 dB SPL is less than 1% of that for 10 dB SPL excitation. The basilar membrane displays a compressive nonlinearity that accommodates the millionfold variation of sound pressure that characterizes audible sounds (0–120 dB SPL) into only two to three orders of magnitude of vibration amplitude (±0.3–300 nm). The sensitivity and frequency selectivity predicted in modeling studies of a passive cochlea correspond to those observed with high-level stimuli. This result implies that the motion of the basilar membrane is augmented more than 100-fold during low-level stimulation at the characteristic frequency, but that amplification diminishes progressively as the stimulus grows in strength. Consequently, amplification lowers the threshold of hearing by more than 40 to 50 dB SPL. In addition to this circumstantial evidence, experimental observations support the idea that the cochlea contains a mechanical amplifier. When a normal

human ear is stimulated with a click, that ear emits one to several measurable pulses of sound within

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 616

A

<!-- image -->


A. The records display evoked otoacoustic emissions from the ears

of five human subjects. A brief click (top trace) was played into

each ear through a miniature speaker. A few milliseconds later, a

tiny microphone in the external auditory meatus detected one or more bursts of sound emission from the ear. (Adapted, with permission, from Wilson 1980. Copyright © 1980 Elsevier B.V.) B. Under suitably quiet recording conditions, spontaneous otoacoustic emissions occur in most normal human ears. This spectrum displays the acoustic power of six prominent emis-

sions and several smaller ones from one ear. (Reproduced, with permission, from Murphy et al. 1995. Copyright © 1995, Acoustical Society of America.)

Stimulus click

10/12/20 3:30 PM

milliseconds (Figure 26–13A). Because they can carry

more energy than the stimulus, these so-called evoked

otoacoustic emissions cannot simply be echoes; they rep-

resent the emission of mechanical energy by the cochlea, triggered by acoustic stimulation. In accordance with the compressive nonlinearity associated with cochlear amplification, the relative level of the emissions decreases with the stimulus level. A still more compelling manifestation of the cochlea's active amplification is spontaneous otoacoustic emission. When a suitably sensitive microphone is

used to measure sound pressure in the ear canals of subjects in a quiet environment, at least 70% of normal human ears continuously emit one or more pure tones (Figure 26–13B). Although these sounds are generally too faint to be directly audible by others, physicians have reported actually hearing sounds emanating from the ears of newborns! What is the source of evoked and spontaneous otoacoustic emissions, and thus presumably of cochlear amplification as well? Several lines of evidence

implicate outer hair cells as the elements that enhance cochlear sensitivity and frequency selectivity and hence act as the motors for amplification. The afferent nerve fibers that extensively innervate the inner hair cells make only minimal contacts with the outer hair cells (Figure 26–4). Instead, the outer hair cells receive an extensive efferent innervation that, when activated, decreases cochlear sensitivity and frequency discrimination. In addition, when stimulated electrically, an isolated outer hair cell displays the unique phenomenon of electromotility: The cell body shortens by up to several micrometers when depolarized and elongates when hyperpolarized (Figure 26–14). This response can occur at frequencies exceeding 80 kHz, an attractive feature for a process postulated to assist highfrequency hearing. The energy for these movements is drawn from the experimentally imposed electrical field rather than from hydrolysis of an energy-rich substrate such Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea

<!-- image -->


electrode at its base causes the cell body to shorten (left);

hyperpolarization causes it to lengthen (right). The oscillatory motions of outer hair cells may provide the mechanical energy that amplifies basilar-membrane motion and thus enhances the sensitivity of human hearing. (Reproduced, with permission, from Holley and Ashmore 1988.)

as ATP. Movement occurs when changes in the electric field across the membrane reorient molecules of the protein prestin. The concerted movement of several million of these molecules, which are packed in the lateral cell membranes of outer hair cells, changes the membrane's area and thus the cell's length. When an outer hair cell transduces mechanical stimulation of its hair bundle into receptor potentials, cochlear amplification might then occur when voltage-induced movement of the cell body augments basilar-membrane motion. Consistent with this hypothesis, mutation of certain amino acid residues required for the voltage sensitivity of prestin abolishes the active process in mice.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 617

Because sharp frequency selectivity, high sensi-

tivity, and otoacoustic emissions are also observed in

animal species that lack outer hair cells and lack high

concentrations of prestin, electromotility cannot be the only form of mechanical amplification by hair cells. In addition to detecting stimuli, hair bundles are also mechanically active and contribute to amplification. Hair bundles can make spontaneous back-and-forth movements that have been shown in some nonmam -mals to underlie spontaneous otoacoustic emissions. Under experimental conditions, bundles can exert force against stimulus probes, performing mechanical work and thereby amplifying the input. In vitro experiments indicate that active hair-bundle motility

10/12/20 3:30 PM


Part IV / Perception

contributes to the cochlear active process even in the

mammalian ear.

Active hair-bundle movements can be fast enough

to mediate otoacoustic emissions at sound frequencies at least as high as a few kilohertz. However, it remains

uncertain whether bundles can generate forces at the very high frequencies at which sharp frequency selectivity and otoacoustic emissions are observed in the mammalian cochlea. Active hair-bundle motility and somatic electromotility may function synergistically, with the former serving metaphorically as a tuner and preamplifier and the latter as a power amplifier. Alternatively, hair-bundle motility may dominate at relatively low frequencies but be superseded by electromotility at higher frequencies. Cochlear Amplification Distorts Acoustic Inputs

When stimulated by two tones at nearby frequen-

## cies f1 f1 and f2 f2 (f1 f1 &lt; f f2 f2 ), the basilar membrane vibrates not only at these frequencies but also at additional

frequencies—the distortion products—that are not present in the acoustic stimulus. As reported by the Italian violinist Giuseppe Tartini in the 18th century, distortion products can be heard as phantom tones in the auditory percept. Remarkably, the cubic difference tone 2f1 f1 – f f2 f2 is heard even at very low sound levels, and its magnitude grows in proportion to the stimulus. Correspondingly, the relative level of distortion remains practically constant over a broad range of sound levels. This phenomenon is explained by the particular form of the compressive nonlinearity associated with cochlear amplification. Clearly, the cochlea does not work as a high-fidelity sound receiver. Distorted cochlear vibrations are strong enough to be reemitted from the ear canal as distortion-product otoacoustic emissions. Because they are a property of healthy ears, these emissions are extensively used to screen hearing in newborns. The Hopf Bifurcation Provides a General Principle for Sound Detection

## Detailed in vivo and in vitro studies have revealed four cardinal features of auditory responsiveness.

First, an active amplification process lowers the detec-

tion threshold. Second, because amplification operates only near a characteristic frequency, the input to the sensory system is actively filtered, which sharpens frequency selectivity. Third, for stimulation near the characteristic frequency, the response displays a compressive nonlinearity that represents a wide range of stimulus levels by a much narrower range of vibration

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 618

amplitudes. Finally, even in the absence of a stimulus,

mechanical activity can produce self-sustained oscilla-

tions that result in otoacoustic emissions.

These features have been recognized as signatures of an active dynamical system—a critical oscillator— that operates on the verge of an oscillatory instabil-

ity termed the Hopf bifurcation (Box 26–1). They are generic: They do not depend on the subcellular and molecular details of the candidate mechanism that brings the system to the brink of spontaneous oscillation. The fact that active hair-bundle motility demonstrates a Hopf bifurcation in vitro provides further evidence that this mechanism contributes to cochlear amplification. Within this framework, the characteristic frequency is set by that of the critical oscillator. The cochlear partition may be viewed as a set of active oscillatory mod-

-

ules that are hydrodynamically coupled by the cochlear fluids and with characteristic frequencies tonotopically distributed along the longitudinal axis of the cochlea. The hypothesis of critical oscillation facilitates modeling of the traveling wave and cochlear amplification. This is because the generic behaviors of a critical oscillator can be described by a single equation termed the "normal form" (Box 26–1). A critical oscillator is ideally suited for auditory detection, even if its inherent nonlinearity yields pronounced distortions in response to complex sound stimuli. Nonlinear interference between the fre quency components of complex stimuli in fact appears as a necessary price to pay for the exquisite sensitivity, sharp frequency selectivity, and wide dynamic range of auditory detection afforded by a critical oscillator. The Hopf bifurcation provides generic properties that account for numerous disparate experimental observations at the level of a single hair bundle, of the basilar membrane, and even in psychoacoustics. This physical principle of auditory detection thus greatly simplifies our understanding of hearing. Although this chapter focusses primarily on mammalian hearing, the common necessity to hear with high sensitivity and sharp frequency selectivity poses similar physical constraints to the ears of all land vertebrates. These constraints have led to the independent evolution of ears that share similar structural features and whose operation is based on similar physical principles, including the use of critical oscillators to amplify sound (Box 26–2). Hair Cells Use Specialized Ribbon Synapses

Being sensory receptors, hair cells form synapses with

## sensory neurons. The basolateral membrane of each

cell contains several presynaptic active zones at which

10/12/20 3:30 PM

Box 26–1 Generic Properties Near a Hopf Bifurcation

## A dynamical system displays a Hopf bifurcation when it abruptly transits from quiescence to a state of sponta-

neous oscillation while subject to continuous variation coefficient, and F is the external force provided by a sound stimulus. In the absence of an external force (F = 0), spon- taneous oscillations emerge when the control parameter

of a control parameter C. If the system is poised in the vicinity of the critical point, at which C = C C state response to sinusoidal forces can be described by a single equation—the "normal form"—of a complex variable Z: Λ dZ dt ≅ -Λ(C c − C − 2ip fc fc )Z − B|Z| 2 Z + F

Here, the real part of Z may represent the position of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A Input (mechanical force)

, its steady(26–1) becomes larger than the critical value C C (Figure 26-15A); the parameter fC fC corresponds to the frequency of spontaneous oscillation at the critical point. A Hopf bifurcation must be driven by an active process, whereby the system mobilizes internal resources of energy to power spontaneous movements. A system operating precisely at the critical point is called a critical oscillator. The response of a critical oscillator to sinusoidal stimuli is endowed with generic properties (Figure 26–15B,C) that are characteristic of sound detection in the ear. Output (displacement)

Low

Control

parameter C


40 60 80

enhances the weakest stimuli much more than the strongest

and with much sharper frequency selectivity. (Adapted, with

permission, from Hudspeth, Jülicher, and Martin 2010.)

C. At the characteristic frequency fC fC , the response—here displacement—displays a compressive growth that corresponds to a line of slope 1/3 in this doubly logarithmic

plot (red line): A large range of stimulus levels is represented by a much narrower range of response amplitudes. In contrast, when the frequency of the stimulus departs significantly from the characteristic frequency (blue line), the response is proportional to the input, corresponding to a line of slope unity. By amplifying weak inputs near its characteristic frequency, the critical oscillator lowers the stimulus level required to elicit a threshold vibration, here by 60 dB for a threshold of 0.3 nm. (Adapted, with permission, from Hudspeth, Jülicher, and Martin 2010.)

<!-- image -->

A. As the control parameter C increases to approach the

critical value CC CC , the response to a sinusoidal stimulus of constant amplitude increases: The system gets more sen-

sitive. For C &gt; CC

CC a constant amplitude and frequency, even if no stimulus is applied. The Hopf bifurcation corresponds to C = CC CC. (Reproduced, with permission, from Hudspeth 2014.) B. When the system is poised at the bifurcation (C = CC CC ), the sensitivity to a low-level stimulus is greatly enhanced near the characteristic frequency fC fC (here 5000 Hz; dashed

, the system oscillates spontaneously at

line), but drops rapidly if the stimulus is detuned from this frequency (red line). For a stimulus 60 dB more intense, the maximal sensitivity is 100-fold lower, and the peak in sensitivity is 100-fold broader (blue line): A critical oscillator

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 619

10/12/20 3:30 PM


Part IV / Perception

Box 26–2 The Evolutionary History of Hearing Resulted in Similarities Between Groups

## Mammals are not alone in possessing sensitive and frequencies lower than about 12 to 14 kHz, whereas

frequency-selective hearing. Amphibians and rep-

tiles, including birds, also do. It is a remarkable fact

that these various groups of land vertebrates actually acquired their good hearing systems largely independently. The small, dedicated auditory receptor organ was present in the inner ear of their common ancestor. Much later, the ancestors of modern lizards, birds, and mammals each independently evolved middle-ear systems with eardrums collecting sound from the outside world. Some species, such as birds and their relatives, even evolved two groups of sensory hair cells that have a division of labor similar to that of mammalian inner and outer hair cells. Comparison of middle-ear and inner-ear structures and functions across all living vertebrate groups has revealed that they share many common features and that hearing performance is largely comparable between them. Sound amplification associated with active hair-bundle motility was already present in the very first hair cells that evolved, even before the first fishes. This amplifying system was inherited by all groups and, as described earlier, plays a critical role in improving hearing sensitivity and sharpening frequency selectivity. The greatest difference between mammals and the other groups is that the upper frequency limit of hearing is generally higher in mammals. Nonmammalian ears are limited in response to

chemical neurotransmitter is released. An active zone

is characterized by four prominent morphological fea-

tures (Figure 26–16).

A presynaptic dense body or synaptic ribbon lies in the cytoplasm adjacent to the release site. This fibrillar structure may be spherical, ovoidal, or flat-

tened, and usually measures a few hundred nanometers across. The dense body resembles the synaptic ribbon of a photoreceptor cell and represents a specialized elaboration of the smaller presynaptic densities found at many other synapses. In addition to molecular components shared with conventional synapses, ribbon synapses contain large amounts of the protein ribeye. The presynaptic ribbon is surrounded by clear synaptic vesicles, each 35 to 40 nm in diameter, which are attached to the dense body by tenuous filaments.

Between the dense body and the presynaptic cell membrane lies a striking presynaptic density that comprises

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 620

some mammals can hear beyond 100 kHz.

In addition to active hair-bundle motility, the second

mechanism that tunes individual hair cells to specific frequencies in many nonmammalian ears is electrical

in nature. In many fishes, amphibians, and birds, the membrane potential of each hair cell resonates at a particular frequency. Several factors, including alternative splicing of the mRNA encoding cochlear K + channels and expression of these channels' auxiliary β subunit, tune the characteristic frequency of the resonance along the tonotopic axis of the auditory organ. Whether electrical resonance contributes to frequency tuning in the ears of mammals, including humans, remains uncertain. It is plausible that mammalian hair cells use instead an interplay between somatic electromotility, which seems absent in nonmammalian species, and the micromechanical environment, including hair-bundle motility, to actively amplify and filter their inputs. The key signatures of a Hopf bifurcation have been recognized in spontaneous mechanical oscillations of the hair bundle, in electrical oscillations of the mem-

brane potential, and in sound-evoked vibration of the basilar membrane. It is likely that the parallel evolution of hearing organs in different groups of vertebrates resulted in several ways of benefitting from the generic properties of critical oscillation.

several short rows of fuzzy-looking material. Within

the cell membrane, rows of large particles are aligned

with the strips of presynaptic density. These particles

include the Ca 2+ channels involved in the release of transmitter as well as the K + channels that participate in electrical resonance in nonmammalian vertebrates. Studies of nonmammalian experimental models show that, as with most other synapses (Chapter 15), the release of transmitter by hair cells is evoked by

2+

presynaptic depolarization and requires influx of Ca from the extracellular medium. Hair cells lack synaptotagmins 1 and 2, however, and the role of those proteins as rapid Ca 2+ sensors has probably been assumed by the protein otoferlin, which also promotes the replenishment of synaptic vesicles. Although glutamate is the principal afferent neurotransmitter, other substances are released as well. The presynaptic apparatus of hair cells has several unusual features that underlie the signaling abilities of

10/12/20 3:30 PM

<!-- image -->

aptic dense body or synaptic ribbon that is characteristic of

the hair cell's presynaptic active zone. It is surrounded by clear synaptic vesicles. Beneath the ribbon lies a presynaptic density, in the middle of which one vesicle is undergoing exocytosis. A modest postsynaptic density lies along the inner aspect of the plasmalemma of the afferent terminal. (Reproduced, with permission, from Jacobs and Hudspeth 1990.)

these cells. At rest, inner hair cells continuously release

synaptic transmitter. The rate of transmitter release

can be modulated upward or downward, depending Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


feature, too, depends on the fact that the presynaptic

Ca

2+

channels are activated at the resting potential.

Outer hair cells receive inputs from neurons in the

brainstem in the form of large boutons on their basolateral surfaces (Figure 26–4). This efferent system

desensitizes the cochlea by hyperpolarizing outer hair cells, which turns down the active process. The efferent terminals contain numerous clear synaptic vesicles about 50 nm in diameter, as well as a smaller number of larger, dense-core vesicles. The principal transmitter at these synapses is acetylcholine (ACh); calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP) also occurs in efferent terminals and may be co-released with ACh. ACh binds to nicotinic ionotropic receptors consisting of α9 and α10 subunits that have a substantial permeability to Ca 2+ as well as to Na + and K + . The Ca 2+ that enters through these channels activates small-conductance Ca 2+ -sensitive K + channels (SK channels), whose opening leads to a protracted hyperpolarization. The cytoplasm of a hair cell immediately beneath each efferent terminal holds a single cisterna of smooth endoplasmic reticulum. This structure may be involved in the reuptake of the Ca 2+ that enters the cytoplasm in response to efferent stimulation, thus accelerating the return to the cell's resting potential. Auditory Information Flows Initially Through

the Cochlear Nerve

## Bipolar Neurons in the Spiral Ganglion Innervate Cochlear Hair Cells

## Information flows from cochlear hair cells to neu -rons whose cell bodies lie in the cochlear ganglion.

The central processes of these bipolar neurons form

the cochlear division of the vestibulocochlear nerve (eighth cranial nerve). Because this ganglion follows a spiral course around the bony core of the cochlea, it is also called the spiral ganglion. Approximately 30,000 ganglion cells innervate the hair cells of each inner ear. The afferent pathways from the human cochlea reflect the functional distinction between inner and outer hair cells. At least 90% of the spiral ganglion

that cells terminate on inner hair cells (Figure 26–17). Each axon contacts only a single inner hair cell, but each cell directs its output to many nerve fibers, on average nearly 10. This arrangement has three important consequences. First, the neural information from which hearing arises originates almost entirely at inner hair cells. Second, because the output of each inner hair cell is

10/12/20 3:30 PM

on whether the hair cell is respectively depolarized or hyperpolarized. Consistent with this observation, some Ca 2+ channels of hair cells are activated at the resting potential, providing a steady leak of Ca 2+ evokes transmitter release from unstimulated cells. Another unusual feature of the hair cell's synapses is that, like those of photoreceptors, they must be able to release neurotransmitter reliably in response to a threshold receptor potential of only 100 μV or so. This

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 621


Part IV / Perception

Figure 26–17 Innervation of cochlear hair

cells.  The great majority of sensory axons

(orange) in the cochlea carry signals from

## inner hair cells, each of which constitutes

the sole input to an average of 10 axons. A few sensory axons of small caliber transmit information from the outer hair cells. Efferrent axons (green) largely innervate the outer hair cells and do so directly. In contrast, efferent innervation of inner hair cells is sparse and occurs on the sensory axon terminals. (Adapted, with permission, from Spoendlin 1974.)

sampled by many afferent nerve fibers, the informa- Outer hair cells

<!-- image -->

tion from one receptor is encoded independently in

parallel channels. Third, at any point along the coch-

lear spiral, or at any position within the spiral ganglion, each ganglion cell responds best to stimulation at the characteristic frequency of the presynaptic hair cell. The tonotopic organization of the auditory neural pathways thus begins at the earliest possible site, immediately postsynaptic to inner hair cells. Relatively few cochlear ganglion cells contact outer hair cells, and each such neuron extends branching terminals to numerous outer hair cells. Although

the ganglion cells that receive input from outer hair cells are known to project into the central nervous system, these neurons are so few that it is not certain whether their projections contribute significantly to the analysis of sound. The patterns of efferent and afferent connections of cochlear hair cells are complementary. Mature inner hair cells do not receive efferent input; just beneath Cochlear Nerve Fibers Encode Stimulus Frequency and Level

## The acoustic sensitivity of axons in the cochlear nerve mirrors the connection pattern of the spiral ganglion

cells to the hair cells. Each axon is most responsive to

a characteristic frequency. Stimuli of lower or higher frequency also evoke responses, but only when presented at greater levels. An axon's responsiveness may be characterized by a frequency selectivity, or tuning, curve, which is V-shaped like the curves for basilarmembrane motion and hair-cell sensitivity (Figure 26–11). The tuning curves for nerve fibers with different characteristic frequencies resemble one another but are shifted along the frequency axis. The relationship between sound level in decibels SPL and firing rate in each fiber of the cochlear nerve is approximately linear. Because of the dependence of

-decibel level on sound pressure, this relation implies that sound pressure is logarithmically encoded by neuronal activity. At the upper end of a fiber's dynamic range, very loud sounds saturate the response. Because an action potential and the subsequent refractory period each last almost 1 ms, the greatest sustainable firing rate is about 500 spikes per second. Even among nerve fibers with the same characteristic frequency, the threshold of responsiveness varies from axon to axon. The most sensitive fibers, whose

response thresholds extend down to approximately

10/12/20 3:30 PM

these cells, however, are extensive axo-axonic synaptic contacts between efferent axon terminals and the end ings of afferent nerve fibers. In contrast, other efferent nerves have extensive connections with outer hair cells on their basolateral surfaces. Each outer hair cell receives input from several large efferent terminals, which fill most of the space between the cell's base and the associated supporting cell, leaving little space for afferent terminals.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 622
Part IV / Perception

Figure 26–17 Innervation of cochlear hair

cells.  The great majority of sensory axons

(orange) in the cochlea carry signals from

## inner hair cells, each of which constitutes

the sole input to an average of 10 axons. A few sensory axons of small caliber transmit information from the outer hair cells. Efferrent axons (green) largely innervate the outer hair cells and do so directly. In contrast, efferent innervation of inner hair cells is sparse and occurs on the sensory axon terminals. (Adapted, with permission, from Spoendlin 1974.)

sampled by many afferent nerve fibers, the informa- Outer hair cells

<!-- image -->

tion from one receptor is encoded independently in

parallel channels. Third, at any point along the coch-

lear spiral, or at any position within the spiral ganglion, each ganglion cell responds best to stimulation at the characteristic frequency of the presynaptic hair cell. The tonotopic organization of the auditory neural pathways thus begins at the earliest possible site, immediately postsynaptic to inner hair cells. Relatively few cochlear ganglion cells contact outer hair cells, and each such neuron extends branching terminals to numerous outer hair cells. Although

the ganglion cells that receive input from outer hair cells are known to project into the central nervous system, these neurons are so few that it is not certain whether their projections contribute significantly to the analysis of sound. The patterns of efferent and afferent connections of cochlear hair cells are complementary. Mature inner hair cells do not receive efferent input; just beneath Cochlear Nerve Fibers Encode Stimulus Frequency and Level

## The acoustic sensitivity of axons in the cochlear nerve mirrors the connection pattern of the spiral ganglion

cells to the hair cells. Each axon is most responsive to

a characteristic frequency. Stimuli of lower or higher frequency also evoke responses, but only when presented at greater levels. An axon's responsiveness may be characterized by a frequency selectivity, or tuning, curve, which is V-shaped like the curves for basilarmembrane motion and hair-cell sensitivity (Figure 26–11). The tuning curves for nerve fibers with different characteristic frequencies resemble one another but are shifted along the frequency axis. The relationship between sound level in decibels SPL and firing rate in each fiber of the cochlear nerve is approximately linear. Because of the dependence of

-decibel level on sound pressure, this relation implies that sound pressure is logarithmically encoded by neuronal activity. At the upper end of a fiber's dynamic range, very loud sounds saturate the response. Because an action potential and the subsequent refractory period each last almost 1 ms, the greatest sustainable firing rate is about 500 spikes per second. Even among nerve fibers with the same characteristic frequency, the threshold of responsiveness varies from axon to axon. The most sensitive fibers, whose

response thresholds extend down to approximately

10/12/20 3:30 PM

these cells, however, are extensive axo-axonic synaptic contacts between efferent axon terminals and the end ings of afferent nerve fibers. In contrast, other efferent nerves have extensive connections with outer hair cells on their basolateral surfaces. Each outer hair cell receives input from several large efferent terminals, which fill most of the space between the cell's base and the associated supporting cell, leaving little space for afferent terminals.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 622

0 dB SPL, characteristically have high rates of sponta-

neous activity and produce saturating responses for

stimulation at moderate intensities, approximately

30 dB SPL. At the opposite extreme, the least sensitive afferent fibers have very little spontaneous activity and much higher thresholds, but respond in a graded fashion to levels even in excess of 100 dB SPL. The activity patterns of most fibers range between these extremes. The afferent neurons of lowest sensitivity contact the surface of an inner hair cell nearest the axis of the cochlear spiral. The most sensitive afferent neurons, on

the other hand, contact the hair cell's opposite side. The multiple innervation of each inner hair cell is therefore not redundant. Instead, the output from a given hair cell is directed into parallel channels of differing sensitivity and dynamic range. The firing pattern of fibers in the eighth cranial nerve exhibits both phasic and tonic components. Brisk firing occurs at the onset of a tone but, as adap-

tation occurs, the firing rate declines to a plateau level over a few tens of milliseconds. When stimulation ceases, there is usually a transitory cessation of activity with a similar time course to that of adaptation, before gradual resumption of the spontaneous firing rate (Figure 26–18). When a periodic stimulus such as a pure tone is presented, the firing pattern of a cochlear nerve fiber encodes information about the periodicity of the stim-

ulus. For example, a relatively low-frequency tone at a moderate intensity might produce one spike in a nerve fiber during each cycle of stimulation. The phase of firing is also stereotyped. Each action potential might occur, for example, during the compressive phase of the stimulus. As the stimulation frequency rises, the stimuli eventually become so rapid that the nerve fiber can no longer produce action potentials on a cycle-bycycle basis. Up to a frequency in excess of 3 kHz, however, phase-locking persists; a fiber may produce an action potential only every few cycles of the stimulus, but its firing continues to occur at a particular phase in the stimulus cycle. Periodicity in neuronal firing enhances the information about the stimulus frequency. Any pure tone of sufficient level evokes firing in numerous cochlear Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea

10 dB

<!-- image -->

Figure 26–18 The firing pattern of a cochlear nerve fiber.  A

cochlear nerve fiber is stimulated for somewhat more than r-

250 ms with a tone burst at about 5 kHz, the cell's character-

istic frequency. After a quiet period, the stimulus is repeated. Histograms show the average response patterns of the fiber as a function of stimulus level. The sample period is divided into discrete temporal bins, and the number of spikes occurring in each bin is displayed. An initial, phasic increase in firing is correlated with the onset of the stimulus. The discharge continues during the remainder of the stimulus during adaptation, but decreases following termination. This pattern is evident when the stimulus is 20 dB or more above threshold. Activity gradually returns to baseline during the interval between stimuli. (Adapted, with permission, from Kiang 1965.) -

10/12/20 3:30 PM

nerve fibers. Those fibers whose characteristic fre quency coincides with the frequency of the stimulus respond at the lowest stimulus level, but respond still more briskly for stimuli of moderate intensity. Other nerve fibers with characteristic frequencies further from the stimulus also respond, although less vigorously. Regardless of their characteristic frequencies, however, all the responsive fibers may display phase

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 623



Part IV / Perception

locking: Each tends to fire during a particular part of

the stimulus cycle.

The central nervous system can therefore gain

information about stimulus frequency in two ways. First, there is a place code: The fibers are arrayed in a

tonotopic map in which the position is related to characteristic frequency. Second, there is a frequency code: The phase-locked firing of the fiber provides information about the frequency of the stimulus, at least for frequencies below 3 kHz. Sensorineural Hearing Loss Is Common but Is

Amenable to Treatment

## Whether mild or profound, most deafness falls into the category of sensorineural hearing loss, often mis-

named "nerve deafness." Although hearing loss can

result from direct damage to the eighth cranial nerve, for example from an acoustic neuroma, deafness stems primarily from the loss of cochlear hair cells and their afferent fibers. The 16,000 hair cells in each human cochlea are not replaced by cell division but must last a lifetime. However, in amphibians and birds, supporting cells

can be induced to divide and their progeny to produce new hair cells. In the zebrafish and in birds, some hair cell populations are regenerated continually by the activity of stem or supporting cells. Researchers have recently succeeded in replenishing mammalian hair cells in vitro. Until we understand how hair cells can be restored to the organ of Corti, however, we must cope with hearing loss. The past few decades have brought remarkable advances in our ability to treat deafness. For the majority of patients who have significant residual hearing,

hearing aids can amplify sounds to a level sufficient to activate the surviving hair cells. A modern aid is custom-tailored to compensate for each individual's hearing loss, so that the device amplifies sounds at frequencies to which the wearer is least sensitive, while providing little or no enhancement to those that can still be heard well. When most or all of a person's cochlear hair cells have degenerated, no amount of amplification can assist hearing. However, a degree of hearing can be

restored by bypassing the damaged organ of Corti with a cochlear prosthesis or implant. A user wears a compact unit that picks up sounds, separates their frequency components, and forwards electronic signals representing these constituents along separate wires to small antennae situated just behind the auricle. The signals are then transmitted transdermally to receiving

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 624

antennae implanted in the temporal bone. From there,

fine wires bear the signals to appropriate electrodes

implanted as an array in the cochlea at various posi-

tions along the scala tympani. Activation of the electrodes excites action potentials in any nearby axons that have survived the degeneration of the hair cells (Figure 26–19). The cochlear prosthesis takes advantage of the tonotopic representation of stimulus frequency along the cochlea—the place code (Figure 26–11 and Chapter 28).

The axons innervating each segment of the cochlea are concerned with a specific, narrow range of frequencies. Each electrode in a prosthesis can excite a cluster of nerve fibers that represent similar frequencies. The stimulated neurons then forward their outputs along the eighth nerve to the central nervous system, where these signals are interpreted as a sound of the frequency represented at that position on the basilar membrane. An array of approximately 20 electrodes can mimic a complex sound by appropriately stimulating several clusters of neurons. The number of implanted cochlear prostheses worldwide is now approaching 350,000. Their effectiveness, however, varies widely from person to per-

son. In the best outcome, an individual can, under quiet conditions, understand speech nearly as well as a normally hearing person and can even conduct telephone conversations. At the other extreme are patients who derive little benefit from prostheses, presumably because of extensive degeneration of the nerve fibers near the electrode array. Most patients find their prostheses of great value. Even if hearing is not completely restored, the devices help in lip reading and alert patients to noises in the environment. Hearing loss is often accompanied by another distressing symptom, tinnitus, or "ringing in the ears." By interfering with concentration and disrupt-

ing sleep, tinnitus can exasperate, depress, and even madden its victims. Because on rare occasions tinni -tus stems from lesions to the auditory pathways, such as acoustic neuromas, it is important in neurological diagnosis to exclude such causes. Most tinnitus, however, is idiopathic: Its cause is uncertain. More and more studies implicate stress as an important factor. Some drugs also trigger the condition; antimalarial drugs related to quinine and aspirin at the high dosages used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis are notorious for this. Often, however, tinnitus occurs at high frequencies to which a damaged ear is no longer sensitive. In these instances, tinnitus may reflect hypersensitivity in the deafferented central nervous system, a phenomenon analogous to phantom limb pain (Chapter 20).

10/12/20 3:30 PM

Figure 26–19 A cochlear prosthesis.

(Reproduced, with permission, from Loeb

et al. 1983.)

A. Transmitting antennas receive electrical signals from a sound processor,

located behind the subject's auricle or on

- the frame of his eyeglasses, and transmit them across the skin to receiving antennas implanted subdermally behind the auricle. The signals are then conveyed in a fine cable (dark purple) to an electrode array in the cochlea. B. This cross section of the cochlea shows the placement of pairs of electrodes in the scala tympani. A portion of
- the extracellular current passed between an electrode pair is intercepted by nearby cochlear nerve fibers, which are thus excited and send action potentials to the brain.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 625

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea

A Sound transmission to cochlea

Transmitting

antennas Auditory nerve

<!-- image -->

B

Cochlea

10/12/20 3:30 PM

membrane



Part IV / Perception

Highlights

1.

Hearing begins with capture of sound by the ear.

Mechanical energy captured by the outer ear flows

through the middle ear to the cochlea, where it

- causes the elastic basilar membrane to oscillate. 2. The basilar membrane supports the receptor organ of the inner ear—the organ of Corti, an epithelial strip that contains approximately 16,000
- mechanosensory hair cells. Hair cells transduce basilar-membrane vibrations into receptor potentials that cause sensory neurons to fire. 3. The frequency components of a sound stimulus are detected at different locations along the basilar membrane by different hair cells, following a
- tonotopic map. Mechanical gradients of the basilar membrane contribute to frequency analysis by the cochlea. In addition, each hair cell is tuned at a characteristic frequency according to its morphological, mechanical, and electrical properties, which vary continuously along the tonotopic axis of the cochlea. 4. Hair cells operate much more quickly than do other sensory receptors, which allows them to respond to sound frequencies beyond 100 kHz in
- some mammalian species. Accordingly, the mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the hair cell are activated directly by mechanical strain. 5. Each hair cell projects from its apical surface a tuft of cylindrical stereocilia—the hair bundle, which works as a mechanical antenna that
- vibrates in response to sound stimuli. The transduction channels occur at the stereociliary tips. Their open probability is modulated by tension changes in tip links that interconnect neighboring stereocilia. 6. Uniquely among sensory receptors, hair cells amplify their inputs to enhance their sensitivity, sharpen their frequency selectivity, and widen
- the range of stimulus levels that they can detect. Two forms of cellular motility contribute to this active process. First, receptor potentials evoke length changes of the somata of outer hair cells, a biological analog of piezoelectricity called electromotility. Second, the hair bundle—the mechanosensory antenna of the hair cell—can vibrate autonomously. 7. The ear not only receives sound but also emits sound called otoacoustic emissions. Spontaneous and evoked otoacoustic emissions result from the
- cochlea's active amplification processes. 8. The cochlea does not work as a high-fidelity sound receiver; instead, it introduces conspicuous

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 626

distortions that contribute to sound perception.

The auditory nonlinearity originates in the cochlea,

which amplifies preferentially weak sound stimuli,

- and constitutes a hallmark of sensitive hearing that is used to screen hearing deficits in newborns. 9. A large variety of experimental observations at the level of a single hair bundle, of the basilar membrane, and in psychoacoustics are readily
- explained if the cochlea contains active mechanical modules that each operate on the verge of an oscillatory instability—the Hopf bifurcation. The Hopf bifurcation provides a general principle of auditory detection that simplifies our understanding of hearing. 10. The evolutionary history of hearing reveals that the various groups of land vertebrates acquired their hearing systems largely independently, but that
- their sensitivity and frequency selectivity are similar. In particular, both mammalian and nonmammalian ears benefit from mechanical amplification of sound inputs and show otoacoustic emissions. Mammals most notably differ from other groups in that their hearing range extends to frequencies beyond 12 to 14 kHz. 11. Analysis of the genetic forms of deafness has provided information on dozens of proteins key to the function of the hair cell, in particular those
- responsible for mechanoelectrical transduction and for synaptic transmission between hair cells and fibers of the auditory nerve. Although these genes may serve as potential targets for future therapies, sensorineural hearing loss is currently treated mostly with hearing aids or cochlear prostheses. New strategies, such as hair-cell replenishment via stem-cell differentiation or optogenetic stimulation of the spiral ganglion, provide promising avenues for research on hearing restoration.

Pascal Martin

Geoffrey A. Manley

Selected Reading

Hudspeth AJ. 1989. How the ear's works work. Nature

341:397–404.

Hudspeth AJ. 2014. Integrating the active process of hair cells

with cochlear function. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:600–614.

10/12/20 3:30 PM

Hudspeth AJ, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2010. A critique of the

critical cochlea: Hopf—a bifurcation—is better than none.

J Neurophysiol 104:1219–1229.

- Kazmierczak P, Sakaguchi H, Tokita J, et al. 2007. Cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15 interact to form tip-link filaments in sensory hair cells. Nature 449:87–91.
- Loeb GE. 1985. The functional replacement of the ear. Sci Am 252:104–111. Pickles JO. 2008. An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing,
- 3rd ed. New York: Academic. Robbles L. Ruggero MA. 2001. Mechanics of the mammalian
- cochlea. Physiol Rev 81:1305–1352. Zheng J, Shen W, He DZZ, Long KB, Madison LD, Dallos P.
2000. Prestin is the motor protein of cochlear outer hair cells. Nature 405:149–155.
- References

Art JJ, Crawford AC, Fettiplace R, Fuchs PA. 1985. Efferent

modulation of hair cell tuning in the cochlea of the turtle.

J Physiol 360:397–421.

- Ashmore JF. 2008. Cochlear outer-hair-cell motility. Physiol Rev 88:173–210. Assad JA, Shepherd GM, Corey DP. 1991. Tip-link integrity
- and mechanical transduction in vertebrate hair cells. Neuron 7:985–994.
- Avan P, Buki B, Petit C. 2013. Auditory distortions: origins and functions. Physiol Rev 93:1563–1619. Barral J, Dierkes K, Lindner B, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2010.
- Coupling a sensory hair-cell bundle to cyber clones enhances nonlinear amplification. Proc Natl Acad Sci
- USA 107:8079–8084. Barral J, Martin P. 2012. Phantom tones and suppressive masking by active nonlinear oscillation of the hair-cell bundle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:E1344–E1351.
- Beurg M, Fettiplace R, Nam J-H, Ricci AJ. 2009. Localization of inner hair cell mechanotransducer channels using high-speed calcium imaging. Nat Neurosci 12:553–558. 2+

Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea


from the guinea pig cochlea. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci

232:413–429.

Howard J, Hudspeth AJ. 1988. Compliance of the hair bun-

- dle associated with gating of mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the bullfrog's saccular hair cell. Neuron
- 1:189–199. Hudspeth AJ, Gillespie PG. 1994. Pulling springs to tune transduction: adaptation by hair cells. Neuron 12:1–9. Jacobs RA, Hudspeth AJ. 1990. Ultrastructural correlates of
- mechanoelectrical transduction in hair cells of the bull -frog's internal ear. Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol
- 55:547–561. Johnson SL, Beurg M, Marcotti W, Fettiplace R. 2011. Prestindriven cochlear amplification is not limited by the outer hair cell membrane time constant. Neuron 70:1143–1154.
- Kemp DT. 1978. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the human auditory system. J Acoust Soc Am 64:1386–1391.
- Kiang NY-S. 1965. Discharge Patterns of Single Fibers in the Cat's Auditory Nerve. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kiang NY-S. 1980. Processing of speech by the auditory nerv-
- ous system. J Acoust Soc Am 68:830–835. Liberman MC. 1982. Single-neuron labeling in the cat audi-
- tory nerve. Science 216:1239–1241. Loeb GE, Byers CL, Rebscher SJ, et al. 1983. Design and fab-
- rication of an experimental cochlear prosthesis. Med Biol Eng Comput 21:241–254.
- Manley GA. 2012. Evolutionary paths to mammalian cochleae. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 13:733–743. Manley GA, Köppl C. 1998. Phylogenic development of the
- cochlea and its innervation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 8:468–474. Martin P, Hudspeth AJ. 1999. Active hair-bundle movements
- can amplify a hair cell's response to oscillatory mechanical stimuli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:14306–14311.
- Michalski N, Petit C. 2015. Genetics of auditory mechanoelectrical transduction. Pflugers Arch 467:49–72. Murphy WJ, Tubis A, Talmadge CL, Long GR. 1995. Relaxa-
- tion dynamics of spontaneous otoacoustic emissions perturbed by external forces. II. Suppression of interacting
- Chan DK, Hudspeth AJ. 2005. Ca current-driven nonlin ear amplification by the mammalian cochlea in vitro Neurosci 8:149–155.
- Corey D, Hudspeth AJ. 1983. Kinetics of the receptor current in bullfrog saccular hair cells. J Neurosci 3:962–976. Crawford AC, Fettiplace R. 1981. An electrical tuning mecha-
- -. Nat emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 97:3711–3720. Oshima K, Shin K, Diensthuber M, Peng AW, Ricci AJ, Heller S. 2010. Mechanosensitive hair cell-like cells from embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell 141:
- nism in turtle cochlear hair cells. J Physiol 312:377–412. Fettiplace R, Kim KX. 2014. The physiology of mechano-
- 704–716. Pan B, Akyuz N, Liu XP, et al. 2018. TMC1 forms the pore of mechanosensory transduction channels in vertebrate inner ear hair cells. Neuron 99:736–753.
- electrical transduction channels in hearing. Physiol Rev 94:951–986.
- Frolenkov GI, Atzori M, Kalinec F, Mammano F, Kachar, B. 1998. The membrane-based mechanism of cell motility in cochlear outer hair cells. Mol Biol Cell 9:1961–1968.
- Glowatzki E, Fuchs PA. 2002. Transmitter release at the hair cell ribbon synapse. Nat Neurosci 5:147–154. Helmholtz HLF. [1877] 1954. On the Sensations of Tone as a
- Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music. New York: Dover. Holley MC, Ashmore JF. 1988. On the mechanism of a high-
- frequency force generator in outer hair cells isolated

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 627

- Probst R, Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. 1991. A review of otoacoustic emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 89:2027–2067. Reichenbach T, Hudspeth AJ. 2014. The physics of hearing:
- fluid mechanics and the active process of the inner ear. Rep Prog Phys 77:0706601.
- Ricci AJ, Crawford AC, Fettiplace R. 2003. Tonotopic variation in the conductance of the hair cell mechanotrans -ducer channel. Neuron 40:983–990.
- Sotomayor M, Weihofen WA, Gaudet R, Corey DP. 2012. Structure of a force-conveying cadherin bond essential for the inner-ear mechanotransduction. Nature 492:128–132.

10/12/20 3:30 PM


Part IV / Perception

Spoendlin H. 1974. Neuroanatomy of the cochlea. In:

E Zwicker, E Terhardt (eds). Facts and Models in Hearing,

pp. 18–32. New York: Springer-Verlag.

- Stauffer EA, Scarborough JD, Hirono M, et al. 2005. Fast adaptation in vestibular hair cells requires myosin-1c activity. Neuron 47:541–553.
- Tinevez JY, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2007. Unifying the various incarnations of active hair-bundle motility by the vertebrate hair cell. Biophys J 93:4053–4067.

Kandel-Ch26\_0598-0628.indd 628

von Békésy G. 1960. Experiments in Hearing. EG Wever (ed,

transl). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Wilson JP. 1980. Evidence for a cochlear origin for acoustic

- re-emissions, threshold fine-structure and tonal tinnitus. Hear Res 2:233–252.
- Wu Z, Müller U. 2016. Molecular identity of the mechanotransduction channel in hair cells: not quiet there yet. J Neurosci 36:10927–10934.

10/12/20 3:30 PM


The Vestibular System

The Vestibular Labyrinth in the Inner Ear Contains Five

Receptor Organs

Hair Cells Transduce Acceleration Stimuli Into

## Receptor Potentials The Semicircular Canals Sense Head Rotation

The Otolith Organs Sense Linear Accelerations

Central Vestibular Nuclei Integrate Vestibular, Visual, Proprioceptive, and Motor Signals

The Vestibular Commissural System Communicates

## Bilateral Information Combined Semicircular Canal and Otolith Signals

Improve Inertial Sensing and Decrease Ambiguity of Translation Versus Tilt

Vestibular Signals Are a Critical Component of Head Movement Control Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Stabilize the Eyes When the

Head Moves The Rotational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates for

## Head Rotation The Translational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates

for Linear Motion and Head Tilts Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Are Supplemented by

Optokinetic Responses The Cerebellum Adjusts the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex

The Thalamus and Cortex Use Vestibular Signals for Spatial Memory and Cognitive and Perceptual Functions

Vestibular Information Is Present in the Thalamus

Vestibular Information Is Widespread in the Cortex

Vestibular Signals Are Essential for Spatial Orientation and Spatial Navigation

Clinical Syndromes Elucidate Normal Vestibular Function

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 629

Caloric Irrigation as a Vestibular Diagnostic Tool

Bilateral Vestibular Hypofunction Interferes With

Normal Vision

Highlights


odern vehicular travel on earth and

through extraterrestrial space relies upon

sophisticated guidance systems that inte-

grate acceleration, velocity, and positional information through transducers, computational algorithms, and satellite triangulation. Yet the principles of inertial guidance are ancient: Vertebrates have used analogous systems for 500 million years and invertebrates for even longer. In these animals, the inertial guidance system, termed the vestibular system, serves to detect and interpret motion through space as well as orientation relative to gravity. Through extensive research over many decades, it is apparent that most, if not all, organisms on Earth have evolved to sense one of the most prevalent

"forces" in our universe, gravity. The mechanisms for the sensory transduction are as diverse as nature could devise. Gravity is most precisely referenced as gravitoinertial acceleration (GIA), a distinct form of linear acceleration directed toward the core of our planet. In truth, gravity varies systematically by as much as 0.5% between the equator and the poles; it increases over mineral-dense regions and decreases over minerallight regions of the Earth's surface. Yet every single behavior that animals perform is referenced to the GIA, and all of our actions and cognitive directives depend

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

upon knowledge of our motion and orientation rela-

tive to it. The first developments of what we refer to as

a vestibular system were actually gravity sensors; as

behavior became increasingly mobile, sensory organs evolved to process rotational accelerations as well. In this chapter we will concentrate on the vestibular system of vertebrates, which has remained highly conserved across many species. Vestibular signals

originate in the labyrinths of the internal ear (Figure 27–1B). The bony labyrinth is a hollow structure within the petrous portion of the temporal bone. Within it lies the membranous labyrinth, which contains sensors for both the vestibular and auditory systems. A

Figure 27–1 The vestibular apparatus

of the inner ear.

A. The orientations of the vestibular and

cochlear divisions of the inner ear are shown with respect to the head.

- B. The inner ear is divided into bony and membranous labyrinths. The bony labyrinth is bounded by the petrosal portion
2. of the temporal bone. Lying within this structure is the membranous labyrinth, which contains the receptor organs for hearing (the cochlea) and equilibrium (the utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals). The space between bone and membrane is filled with perilymph, whereas the membranous labyrinth is filled with endolymph. Sensory cells in the utricle, saccule, and ampullae of the semicircular canals respond to motion of the head. (Adapted from Iurato 1967.)

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 630

The vestibular receptors consist of two parts: two

otolith organs, the utricle and saccule, which measure lin-

ear accelerations, and three semicircular canals, which

Direction measure angular accelerations. Rotational motion (angular acceleration) is experienced during head turns, whereas linear acceleration occurs during walking, falling, vehicular travel (ie, translations), or head tilts relative to gravity. These receptors send vestibular information to the brain, where it is integrated into an appropriate signal regarding direction and speed of motion, as well as the position of the head relative to the GIA. Many of the central vestibular neurons at the first junction with receptor afferent fibers also

of view

Semicircular canals

(head rotation)

Otolith organs

(linear motion)

Endolymph

Perilymph

Bone

<!-- image -->

09/12/20 5:01 PM

receive convergent signals from other systems such as

proprioceptors, visual signals, and motor commands.

Central processing of these multimodal signals occurs

very rapidly to ensure adequate coordination of visual gaze and postural responses, autonomic responses, and awareness of spatial orientation. The Vestibular Labyrinth in the Inner Ear

Contains Five Receptor Organs

## The membranous labyrinth is supported within the bony labyrinth by a filamentous network of connective tissue.

The vestibular portion of the membranous labyrinth lies

lateral and posterior to the cochlea. Vestibular receptors are contained in specialized enlarged regions of the membranous labyrinth, termed the ampullae for the semicircular canals and maculae for the otolith organs (Figure 27–1B). Both of the otolith organs lie in a central compartment of the membranous labyrinth, the vestibule, which is surrounded by the bony labyrinth of the same name. The membranous labyrinth is filled with endolymph, a K + -rich (150 mM) and Na + -poor (16 mM) fluid whose composition is maintained by the action of ion

Figure 27–2 Hair cells in the vestibular pumps in specialized cells. Endolymph bathes the surface of the vestibular receptor cells. Surrounding the membranous labyrinth, in the space between the membranous labyrinth and the wall of the bony labyrinth, is perilymph. Perilymph is a high-Na + (150 mM), low-K + (7 mM) fluid similar in composition to cerebrospinal fluid, with which it is in communication through the cochlear duct. Perilymph bathes the basal surface of the receptor epithelia and the vestibular nerve fibers. Two fluid-tight partitions in the bony labyrinth, the oval and round windows (Figure 27–1B), connect the perilymphatic space to the middle ear cavity. The oval window is connected to the tympanic membrane by the middle ear ossicles. These windows are important

labyrinth transduce mechanical stimuli

into neural signals. At the apex of each cell

are the stereocilia, which increase in length toward the single kinocilium. The membrane potential of the receptor cell depends on the direction in which the stereocilia are bent. Deflection toward the kinocilium causes the cell to depolarize and thus increases the rate of firing in the afferent fiber. Bending away from the kinocilium causes the cell to hyperpolarize, thus decreasing the afferent firing rate. (Adapted, with permission, from Flock 1965.)

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 631

<!-- image -->

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


for sound transduction (Chapter 26). The endolymph

and perilymph are kept separate by a junctional com-

plex of support cells that surrounds the apex of each

receptor cell. Disruption of the balance between these two fluids (by trauma or disease) can result in vestibular dysfunction, leading to dizziness, vertigo, and spatial disorientation. During development, the labyrinth progresses from a simple sac to a complex set of interconnected sensory organs, but retains the same fundamental top-

ological organization. Each organ originates as an epithelium-lined pouch that buds from the otic cyst, and the endolymphatic spaces within the several organs remain continuous in the adult. The endolymphatic spaces of the vestibular labyrinth are also connected to the cochlear duct through the ductus reuniens (Figure 27–1B). In addition, the membranous labyrinth contains a small tube, the endolymphatic duct, which extends through a space in the sigmoid bone, the vestibular aqueduct, to end in a blind sac adjacent to the dura in the epidural space of the posterior cranial fossa. It is thought that the endolymphatic sac has both absorptive and excretive functions to maintain the ionic composition of the endolymphatic fluid. Hair Cells Transduce Acceleration Stimuli Into Receptor Potentials

## Each of the five receptor organs has a cluster of hair cells responsible for transducing head motion into vestibular signals. Hair cells are so named due to an array

of nearly 100 staggered height stereocilia. The shortest stereocilia are at one end of the cell and the tallest at the other, ending with the only true cilium of the hair cell, termed the kinocilium. The kinocilium is typically the tallest of all stereocilia. Angular or linear acceleration of the head leads to a deflection of the stereocilia, which together compose the hair bundle (Figure 27–2). Excitation Inhibition

09/12/20 5:01 PM
receive convergent signals from other systems such as

proprioceptors, visual signals, and motor commands.

Central processing of these multimodal signals occurs

very rapidly to ensure adequate coordination of visual gaze and postural responses, autonomic responses, and awareness of spatial orientation. The Vestibular Labyrinth in the Inner Ear

Contains Five Receptor Organs

## The membranous labyrinth is supported within the bony labyrinth by a filamentous network of connective tissue.

The vestibular portion of the membranous labyrinth lies

lateral and posterior to the cochlea. Vestibular receptors are contained in specialized enlarged regions of the membranous labyrinth, termed the ampullae for the semicircular canals and maculae for the otolith organs (Figure 27–1B). Both of the otolith organs lie in a central compartment of the membranous labyrinth, the vestibule, which is surrounded by the bony labyrinth of the same name. The membranous labyrinth is filled with endolymph, a K + -rich (150 mM) and Na + -poor (16 mM) fluid whose composition is maintained by the action of ion

Figure 27–2 Hair cells in the vestibular pumps in specialized cells. Endolymph bathes the surface of the vestibular receptor cells. Surrounding the membranous labyrinth, in the space between the membranous labyrinth and the wall of the bony labyrinth, is perilymph. Perilymph is a high-Na + (150 mM), low-K + (7 mM) fluid similar in composition to cerebrospinal fluid, with which it is in communication through the cochlear duct. Perilymph bathes the basal surface of the receptor epithelia and the vestibular nerve fibers. Two fluid-tight partitions in the bony labyrinth, the oval and round windows (Figure 27–1B), connect the perilymphatic space to the middle ear cavity. The oval window is connected to the tympanic membrane by the middle ear ossicles. These windows are important

labyrinth transduce mechanical stimuli

into neural signals. At the apex of each cell

are the stereocilia, which increase in length toward the single kinocilium. The membrane potential of the receptor cell depends on the direction in which the stereocilia are bent. Deflection toward the kinocilium causes the cell to depolarize and thus increases the rate of firing in the afferent fiber. Bending away from the kinocilium causes the cell to hyperpolarize, thus decreasing the afferent firing rate. (Adapted, with permission, from Flock 1965.)

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 631

<!-- image -->

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


for sound transduction (Chapter 26). The endolymph

and perilymph are kept separate by a junctional com-

plex of support cells that surrounds the apex of each

receptor cell. Disruption of the balance between these two fluids (by trauma or disease) can result in vestibular dysfunction, leading to dizziness, vertigo, and spatial disorientation. During development, the labyrinth progresses from a simple sac to a complex set of interconnected sensory organs, but retains the same fundamental top-

ological organization. Each organ originates as an epithelium-lined pouch that buds from the otic cyst, and the endolymphatic spaces within the several organs remain continuous in the adult. The endolymphatic spaces of the vestibular labyrinth are also connected to the cochlear duct through the ductus reuniens (Figure 27–1B). In addition, the membranous labyrinth contains a small tube, the endolymphatic duct, which extends through a space in the sigmoid bone, the vestibular aqueduct, to end in a blind sac adjacent to the dura in the epidural space of the posterior cranial fossa. It is thought that the endolymphatic sac has both absorptive and excretive functions to maintain the ionic composition of the endolymphatic fluid. Hair Cells Transduce Acceleration Stimuli Into Receptor Potentials

## Each of the five receptor organs has a cluster of hair cells responsible for transducing head motion into vestibular signals. Hair cells are so named due to an array

of nearly 100 staggered height stereocilia. The shortest stereocilia are at one end of the cell and the tallest at the other, ending with the only true cilium of the hair cell, termed the kinocilium. The kinocilium is typically the tallest of all stereocilia. Angular or linear acceleration of the head leads to a deflection of the stereocilia, which together compose the hair bundle (Figure 27–2). Excitation Inhibition

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

Specialized ion channels in the tips of the hair

bundle stereocilia allow K

+

to enter or be blocked from

the surrounding endolymph (Chapter 26). This action

allows hair cells to act as mechanoreceptors, where deflection of the stereocilia produces a depolarizing or hyperpolarizing receptor potential depending on which direction the hair bundle moves (Figure 27–2). These depolarizations and hyperpolarizations of the receptor membrane lead to excitation and inhibition, respectively, in the firing rate of the innervating afferent (Figure 27–2). In each vestibular receptor organ, hair cells are arranged so that movement directional specificity is defined by excitation in some cells and inhibition in other cells. Vestibular signals are carried from the hair cells to the brain stem by branches of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII), which enter the brain stem

and terminate in the ipsilateral vestibular nuclei, cerebellum, and reticular formation. Cell bodies of the vestibular nerve are located in Scarpa's ganglia within the internal auditory canal (Figure 27–1A). The superior vestibular nerve innervates the horizontal and anterior canals and the utricle, whereas the inferior vestibular nerve innervates the posterior canal and the saccule. The labyrinth's vascular supply, which arises from the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, travels with nerve VIII. The anterior vestibular artery supplies the structures innervated by the superior vestibular nerve, and the posterior vestibular artery supplies the structures innervated by the inferior vestibular nerve. All vertebrate receptor hair cells receive efferent inputs from the brain stem. The function of the efferent innervation of vestibular receptors is still a subject of

debate. Stimulation of the efferent fibers from the brain stem changes the sensitivity of the afferent axons from the hair cells. It increases the excitability of some afferents and hair cells while inhibiting others, and varies across species. The Semicircular Canals Sense Head Rotation

An object undergoes angular acceleration when its

## rate of rotation about an axis changes. Therefore, the

head undergoes angular acceleration when it turns or

tilts, when the body rotates, and during active or passive locomotion. The three semicircular canals of each vestibular labyrinth detect these angular accelerations and report their magnitudes and motion directions to the brain. Each semicircular canal is a semicircular tube of membranous labyrinth extending from the vestibule. One end of each canal is open to the vestibule, whereas

at the other end, the ampulla, the entire lumen of the

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 632

canal is traversed by a fluid-tight gelatinous diaphragm,

the cupula. The stereocilia and the kinocilium protrude

into the gelatinous cupula, while the hair cells are

located below in a receptor epithelium, the crista, along with the innervating afferent terminals (Figure 27–3). The vestibular organs detect accelerations of the head because the inertia of endolymph and cupula results in forces acting on the stereocilia. Consider the

simplest situation, a rotation in the plane of a semicircular canal. When the head begins to rotate, the membranous and bony labyrinths move along with it. Because of its inertia, however, the endolymph lags behind the surrounding membranous labyrinth, thus pushing the cupula in a direction opposite that of the head (Figure 27–3B). The motion of endolymph in a semicircular canal can be demonstrated with a cup of coffee. While gently twisting the cup about its vertical axis, observe a

particular bubble near the fluid's outer boundary. As the cup begins to turn, the coffee tends to maintain its initial orientation in space and thus counter-rotates in the cup. If you continue rotating the cup at the same speed, the coffee (and the bubble) eventually catches up to the cup and rotates with it. When the cup decelerates and stops, the coffee keeps rotating, moving in the opposite direction relative to the cup. In the ampulla, this relative motion of the endolymph creates pressure on the cupula, bending it toward or away from the adjacent vestibule, depending on the

direction of endolymph flow. The resulting deflection of the stereocilia alters the membrane potential of the hair cells, thereby changing the firing rates of the associated sensory fibers. Each semicircular canal is maximally sensitive to rotations in its plane. The horizontal canal is oriented approximately 30° elevated above the naso-occipital axis (roughly in the horizontal plane as a person walks and looks at the ground ahead) and thus is most sensitive to rotations in the horizontal plane. The stereocilia are arranged so that leftward rotational motion is excitatory for the left horizontal canal and inhibitory for the right horizontal canal. The anterior and posterior canals are oriented more vertically in the head, at an angle of approximately 45 degrees from the sagittal plane (Figure 27–4). Similar rotational motion downward in the plane of the anterior canals is excitatory for anterior canal hair cells, while upward head motion is excitatory for posterior canals. Because there is approximate mirror symmetry of the left and right labyrinths, the six canals effectively operate as three coplanar pairs. The two hori-

zontal canals form one pair; each of the other pairs consists of one anterior canal on one side of the head and the contralateral posterior canal. Further, the three

09/12/20 5:01 PM

Figure 27–3 The ampulla of a semi-

circular canal.

A. A thickened zone of epithelium, the

## ampullary crista, contains the hair cells. The stereocilia and the kinocilia of the

hair cells extend into a gelatinous diaphragm, the cupula, which stretches from the crista to the roof of the ampulla. B. The cupula is displaced by the relative movement of endolymph when the head turns. As a result, the hair bundles

- are also displaced. Their movement is greatly exaggerated in the diagram.

A

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


Ampulla Cupula Ampullary

crista

<!-- image -->

Midsagittal line

<!-- image -->

Figure 27–4 The bilateral symmetry of the semicircular

canals.  The horizontal canals on both sides lie in approxi-

mately the same plane and therefore are functional pairs. The

bilateral vertical canals have a more complex relationship. The anterior canal on one side and the posterior canal on the

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 633

Semicircular

canal

Angular

acceleration

Endolymph

ow

Cochlea

Semicircular canals:

Anterior vertical

Posterior vertical

Internal acoustic

opposite side lie in parallel planes and therefore constitute a

functional pair. The vertical semicircular canals lie nearly 45°

from the midsagittal plane. Each of the semicircular canals on

one side of the head lie in approximately orthogonal planes to each other.

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

semicircular canals on each side of the head lie roughly

orthogonal to each other (Figure 27–4). When the head

moves toward the receptor hair cells (eg, leftward

head turns for the left horizontal semicircular canal), the stereocilia are bent toward the tall kinocilium, thus exciting (depolarizing) the cell. Head motion in the opposite direction causes bending away from the kinocilum and toward the smallest stereocilia, thus closing the channels and inhibiting (hyperpolarizing) the cell. The left and right ear semicircular canals have opposite polarity; thus, when you turn your head to the left, the receptors in the left horizontal semicircular

canal will be excited (increased firing rate), whereas right horizontal canal receptors will be inhibited (decreased firing rate; Figure 27–5). The same relationship is true for the vertical semicircular canals. The canal planes are also roughly aligned to the pulling planes of specific eye muscles. The pair of horizontal canals lies in the pulling plane of the lateral and medial rectus muscles. The left anterior and right posterior canal pair lie in the pulling plane of the left superior

Figure 27–5 The left and right horizontal semi-

circular canals work together to signal head

movement. Because of inertia, rotation of the head

in a counterclockwise direction causes endolymph to move clockwise with respect to the canals. This deflects the stereocilia in the left canal in the excita -tory direction, thereby exciting the afferent fibers on this side. In the right canal, the afferent fibers are hyperpolarized so that firing decreases.

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 634

and inferior rectus and right superior and inferior

oblique muscles. The right anterior and left posterior

pair occupies the pulling plane of the left superior and

inferior oblique and right superior and inferior rectus muscles. The Otolith Organs Sense Linear Accelerations

The vestibular system must compensate not only for

## head rotations but also for linear motion. The two oto -lith organs, the utricle and saccule, detect linear motion

as well as the static orientation of the head relative to gravity, which is itself a linear acceleration. Each organ consists of a sac of membranous labyrinth approximately 3 mm in the longest dimension. The hair cells of each organ are arranged in a roughly elliptical patch called the macula. The human utricle contains approximately 30,000 hair cells, whereas the saccule contains some 16,000. The hair bundles of the otolithic hair cells extend into a gelatinous sheet, the otolithic membrane, which

rning

Turn motion of head Axis of hair cells Ampulla Horizontal canals

<!-- image -->

09/12/20 5:01 PM

into the otolithic membrane, a gelatinous material that is covered Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System Otolithic membrane Hair cells depolarize, exciting afferent bers a particular direction. When the head is tilted in the direction

by millions of calcium carbonate particles (otoconia). The hair bundles are polarized but are oriented in different directions. The directional polarity of each hair cell is organized relative to a reversal region running through the center of the utricle, termed covers the entire macula (Figure 27–6). Embedded on

<!-- image -->

the surface of this membrane are fine, dense particles

of calcium carbonate called otoconia (Greek root trans-

lates to "ear dust"), which give the otolith ("ear stone") organs their name. Otoconia are typically 0.5 to 30 μm long; thousands of these particles are attached to the otolithic membranes of the utricle and saccule. Gravity and other linear accelerations exert shear forces on the otoconial matrix and the gelatinous otolithic membrane, which can move relative to the mem-

branous labyrinth. This results in a deflection of the hair bundles, altering activity in the vestibular nerve to signal linear acceleration owing to translational motion or gravity. The orientations of the otolith organs and the directional sensitivity of individual hair cells are such that a linear acceleration along any axis can be sensed. For example, with the head in its normal position, the macula of each utricle is raised above the naso-occipital axis by approximately 30°, similar to the horizontal semicircular canal. In normal resting head position, the utricle is deviated to bring the utricle approximately equal to an Earth horizontal plane. Any acceleration in the horizontal plane excites some hair cells in each

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 635

of a hair cell's axis of polarity, that cell depolarizes and excites the afferent fiber. When the head is tilted in the opposite direction, the same cell hyperpolarizes and inhibits the afferent fiber. (Adapted from Iurato 1967.) utricle and inhibits others, according to their orienta-

tions (Figures 27–6 and 27–7).

The operation of the paired saccules resembles

that of the utricles. The hair cells represent all possible

Medial

Otoconia Striola Posterior

<!-- image -->

curves across the surface of the macula containing the hair

cells, resulting in a characteristic variation in the axes of mechanosensitivity (arrows) in the population of hair cells. Because of this arrangement, tilt in any direction depolarizes some cells and hyperpolarizes others, while having no effect on the remainder. (Adapted, with permission, from Spoendlin 1966.)

09/12/20 5:01 PM



Part IV / Perception

orientations within the plane of each saccular macula,

but the maculae are oriented vertically in nearly parasag-

ittal planes. The saccules are therefore especially sensi-

tive to vertical accelerations. Certain saccular hair cells also respond to accelerations in the horizontal plane, in particular those along the anterior–posterior axis. Central Vestibular Nuclei Integrate Vestibular,

(horizontal eye movements) and interstitial nucleus

of Cajal (vertical eye movements). These nuclei are

described in some detail later.

Another major output pathway concerned with gaze control arises from the medial vestibular nucleus (as well as lesser projections from the descending and

Visual, Proprioceptive, and Motor Signals

## The vestibular nerve projects ipsilaterally from the vestibular ganglion mainly to four vestibular nuclei

(medial, lateral, superior, and descending) in the dor-

sal part of the pons and medulla, in the floor of the fourth ventricle. Many vestibular nerve fibers also bifurcate, sending a direct projection to the fastigial nucleus, the nodulus and uvula, and the reticular for mation (Figure 27–8A). These nuclei integrate signals from the vestibular organs with signals from the spinal cord, cerebellum, and visual system. The vestibular nuclei project, in turn, to many central targets, including the oculomotor nuclei, reticular and spinal centers concerned with gaze and postural

-lateral vestibular nuclei) and projects bilaterally to the cervical spinal cord through the medial vestibulospinal tract (Figure 27–9; see Chapter 35). There are two categories of medial vestibulospinal fibers. Vestibulospinal neurons project only to the spinal cord to control neck musculature. Vestibulo-ocular neurons project to both the spinal cord and the oculomotor nuclei and are involved in coordinated eye and head movements to maintain gaze stability. The lateral vestibular nucleus (Deiters' nucleus) receives fibers from the semicircular canals medially and the otolith organs laterally. There is a major output

movement, and the thalamus (Figure 27–9). Many vestibular nuclei neurons have reciprocal connections with the cerebellum, primarily in the floculo-nodular lobe, that form important regulatory mechanisms for eye movements, head movements, and posture (Figures 27–8 and 27–9). The vestibular nuclei receive inputs from the premotor cortex, the accessory optic system (nucleus of the optic tract), the neural integrator nuclei (nucleus prepossitus hypoglossi and interstitial nucleus of Cajal), and the reticular formation (Figure 27–8). Further projections from the vestibular nuclei reach the rostral and caudal lateral medulla nuclei that are involved in regulation of blood pressure, heart rate, respiration, and bone remodeling, as well as the parabrachial nucleus for homeostasis modulation. Finally, there are projections from the vestibular nuclei to the medial geniculate (auditory) nuclei, as well as the supragenual nucleus and dorsal tegmental nucleus, which contribute to spatial orientation (Figure 27–9). The superior and medial vestibular nuclei receive fibers predominantly from the semicircular canals in the medial regions and some otolith input in the lateral to all levels of the ipsilateral spinal cord through the lateral vestibulospinal tract that is concerned principally with postural reflexes through modulation of limb and axial musculature (Figure 27–9). Lateral vestibular nuclei neurons also project heavily to the reticular formation. The descending vestibular nucleus receives predominantly otolithic input, but also receives semicircular canal fibers medially, and projects to the cerebellum, reticular formation, and spinal cord (medial vestibulospinal tract). The primary neurotransmitters for excitatory vestibular nuclear projections include glutamate, whereas the inhibitory projections are either glycine or γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Vestibular projections to the spinal systems are discussed in more detail in Chapter 36. The Vestibular Commissural System Communicates Bilateral Information

## Many of these vestibular nuclei neurons receive convergent motion information from the opposite ear

through an inhibitory commissural pathway that uses

-GABA as a neurotransmitter (Figure 27–8B). The commissural pathway is highly organized according to the type of receptor from which information is received. For example, cells receiving signals from the ipsilateral horizontal excitatory canal will also receive signals from the contralateral horizontal canal through an inhibitory interneuron. Due to the directional selectivity of the receptors in each ear, the contralateral horizontal canal input will always be decreased during an ipsilateral head turn, in effect "disinhibiting" the inhibitory input from the contralateral side. The effect of the commissural system is to increase the response of the vestibular nuclei neuron and

09/12/20 5:01 PM

regions (Figure 27–8). They send fibers predominantly to the cerebellum, reticular formation, thalamus, ocu lomotor centers, and spinal cord (Figure 27–9). Oculomotor center outputs include the three oculomotor nuclei (abducens, oculomotor, trochlear), as well as the neural integrators for converting head velocity into head position signals in the nucleus hypoglossi

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 636

A Afferent projections

to vestibular nuclei Cerebellum Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System Reticular formation Superior nucleus Medial nucleus Premotor and multisensory cortex Neural integrator Reticular formation Commissural bers proprioceptor all vestibular nuclei, the nodulus and uvula, and the reticular for-

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


r-

mation. (Adapted, with permission, from Gacek and Lyon 1974.)

B. Central projections to the vestibular nuclei arise from a

number of cortical, brain stem, and spinal cord regions. These include the premotor and multisensory cortices, accessory

to vestibular nuclei

<!-- image -->

Figure 27–8 Afferent fiber and central projections to the

vestibular nuclei.

A. Afferent fibers from vestibular receptors terminate in the

brain stem and cerebellum. Fibers from semicircular canals project primarily to the medial portions of the superior and

-optic nuclei, cerebellum, neural integrator nuclei, reticular formation, spinal cord, and commissural fibers from the contralateral vestibular nuclei.

09/12/20 5:01 PM

medial vestibular nuclei, the descending vestibular nucleus, the cerebellum (nodulus and uvula), and the reticular formation. Fib ers from the otoliths primarily project to the lateral portions of

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 637

Lateral

nucleus

Medial

nucleus


Part IV / Perception

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 638

decrease noise from the incoming afferent signal, giv-

ing rise to a "push-pull" vestibular function. From an

engineering point of view, the "push-pull" set point

in the nuclei neurons constantly updates canal signals from the opposing ear to act as a comparator junction and can explain the relatively high spontaneous firing rate of canal afferents at nearly 100 spikes/s. For example, during a leftward head turn, left brain stem nuclei neurons receive high firing rate signals from the left horizontal canal and low firing rate signals from the right horizontal canal. The comparison of activity is interpreted as a left head turn (Figure 27–5). Similar comparisons between signals also occur for inputs from the anterior semicircular canal on one side and the posterior semicircular canal on the opposite ear side. Thus, for rotational motion in any head plane, the comparator is able to determine the direction of movement with great specificity. Any disruption of the normal balance between left and right ear canal inputs (eg, from trauma or disease in the receptor organs or nerve) will be interpreted by the

brain as a head rotation, even though the head is stationary. These effects often lead to illusions of spinning or rotating that can be quite upsetting and may produce nausea or vomiting. However, over time, the commissural fibers provide for vestibular compensation, a process by which the loss of unilateral vestibular receptor function is partially restored centrally and behavioral responses such as the vestibulo-ocular reflex mostly recover. Combined Semicircular Canal and Otolith Signals Improve Inertial Sensing and Decrease Ambiguity

of Translation Versus Tilt

## In some instances, the vestibular input from a single receptor may be ambiguous. For example, Einstein

(1908) showed that linear accelerations are equivalent

Figure 27–9 (Left) Output projections from the vestibular whether they arise from translational motion or tilts of the head relative to gravity. The otolith receptors cannot

nuclei.  The vestibular nuclei project to a number of brain

regions below the cortical level. Two separate descending

## pathways project through the lateral and medial vestibulospinal tracts (LVST, MVST) to terminate in the spinal cord. The ves-

tibular nuclei also project to the reticular formation and the lateral medullary nuclei in the brain stem. Ascending projections to the supragenual nucleus, the dorsal tegmental nucleus, the oculomotor nuclei (abducens, oculomotor, and trochlear), and the neural integrator nuclei are very prominent (red line, excitatory; gray line, inhibitory), as are projections to the cerebellum (nuclei, nodulus, and uvula). Other prominent vestibular projections terminate in the geniculate nuclei and the thalamus (ventral lateral, posterior, and intralaminar thalamic regions).

09/12/20 5:01 PM

a

Increased ring Fg Increased ring of afferents

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Subject tilts to his left Subject is moved right

<!-- image -->

Figure 27–10 Vestibular inputs signaling body posture and

motion can be ambiguous.  The postural system cannot dis-

<!-- image -->

tinguish between tilt and linear acceleration of the body based

on otolithic inputs alone. The same shearing force acting on vestibular hair cells can result from tilting of the head (left), which exposes the hair cells to a portion of the acceleration (a) owing to gravity (Fg), or from horizontal linear acceleration of the body (right). discriminate between the two: So how is it that we can

tell the difference between translating rightward and

tilting leftward, where the linear acceleration signaled

by the otolith afferents is the same (Figure 27–10)? It is now well established that convergent vestibular nuclei and cerebellar neurons use combined signals from both the semicircular canals and the otolith

receptors and some simple computations to discriminate between tilt and translation. As a result, some central vestibular and cerebellar cells encode head tilt, whereas other cells encode translational motion, which, as we will see, is extremely important for the control of head and eye movements. Vestibular Signals Are a Critical Component of Head Movement Control

## An important discovery is the differing responses in some vestibular nuclei neurons to actively versus

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 639

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


passively generated head movements. Specifically,

in contrast to vestibular afferents, some neurons in

the vestibular nuclei and cerebellum well known

for responding to vestibular stimuli during passive movement lose or reduce their sensitivity during self-generated movement. The preferential response to passive motion, or to the passive components of combined active and passive motion, has been interpreted as sensory prediction error signals: The brain predicts how self-generated motion activates the vestibular organs and subtracts these predictions from afferent signals. Such error signals are important for the on-line control of head movement, as well as head movement estimation. Computationally, these properties have been interpreted quantitatively using concepts common to all sensorimotor systems; that is, active and pas-

sive motion signals are processed by internal models of the motion sensor (ie, the canals, otolith organs, and neck proprioceptors). The brain uses an internal representation of the laws of physics and sensory dynamics (which can be elegantly modeled as forward internal models of the sensors) to process vestibular signals. Without such error signals, accurate self-motion estimation would be severely compromised. These computational insights suggest that, unlike early interpretations, vestibular signals remain critically important when coupled to self-motion estimation and head movement control during actively generated head movements.

Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Stabilize the Eyes

When the Head Moves

## In order to see clearly and maintain focus on visual objects during head motion, the eyes maintain foveal

fixation through a series of vestibulo-ocular reflexes

(VORs). If you shake your head back and forth while reading, you can still discern words because of the VORs. If instead you move the book at a similar speed while holding your head steady, you can no longer read the words. In the latter instance, vision provides the brain with the only corrective feedback for stabilizing of the image on the retina, and visual processing in verte-

brates is much slower (around 100 ms latency) and less effective than vestibular processing (around 10 ms) for image stabilization. The vestibular apparatus signals how fast the head is rotating, and the oculomotor system uses this information to stabilize the eyes to fix visual images on the retina.

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

There are two components of VORs. The rotational

VOR compensates for head rotation and receives its

input predominantly from the semicircular canals. The

translational VOR compensates for linear head movement. These two VOR responses arise from connections from vestibular nuclei neurons to the abducens, oculomotor, and trochlear nuclei (Figure 27–9). The Rotational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates for Head Rotation

## When the semicircular canals sense head rotation in one direction, the eyes rotate in the opposite direc-

tion at equal velocity in the orbits (Figure 27–11). This

compensatory eye rotation is called the vestibular slow phase, although it is not necessarily slow: The eyes may reach speeds of more than 200 degrees per second if the head's rotation is fast. During fast head movements, the VOR must act quickly to maintain stable gaze. A trisynaptic pathway, the three-neuron arc, connects each semicircular canal to the appropriate eye muscle (Figure 27–11). The rotational VOR represents a phylogenetically old reflex. Many invertebrates and all vertebrate species, from amphibians, reptiles, fish, and birds to non-

human primates, have the ability to reflexively rotate their eyes opposite to the direction of head rotation, thus keeping the visual world stable on the retina. Primary afferents from the horizontal semicircular canals send excitatory signals through the vestibular nuclei and the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the contralateral abducens nucleus (Figure 27–11). Abducens motor neurons send impulses via cranial nerve VI to excite the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. At the same time, abducens interneurons send excitatory signals to motor neurons in the contralateral oculomotor nucleus, which innervates the medial rectus muscle (see Chapter 35 for details on other projections). The three-synapse pathway illustrated in Figure 27–11 is not sufficient to elicit appropriate compensatory eye movements. This is because the afferent

signal from the semicircular canals is proportional to head velocity, while the compensatory eye movement requires eye position changes. To convert velocity to position requires temporal integration (simple calculus) that occurs through neural networks in the brain stem nuclei for most head motion speeds. However, at high rotation frequencies, the viscoelastic properties of the eyeball, eye muscles, and surrounding tissues provide an additional integration step. Thus, the rotational VOR is thought to consist of two parallel processes. The first process consists of the direct neural pathway known as the three-neuron arc (Figure 27–11).

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 640

The second neural integrator process consists of

additional parallel pathways that ensure that the cor-

rect proportion of velocity and position commands

are delivered to the oculomotor nuclei to move the eye appropriately (Figure 27–9 and see Chapter 35). Without this second indirect integrator pathway, the response to a head rotation would initially bring the eye to the correct position, but the eye would drift away from that position since the oculomotor neurons would lack the tonic input to compensate for the elastic restoring forces of the eyeball (Chapter 35). This is exactly what happens after lesions of brainstem and cerebellar structures that are thought to participate in this neural integration (eg, the prepositus hypoglossi and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal; Figure 27–9). It is generally thought that the integrator pathway is shared by all conjugate eye movement systems (saccades, smooth pursuit, and the VOR), although the direct pathway is at least partly segregated for different types of eye movements (ie, VOR, smooth pursuit, saccades). With continued head rotation, the eyes eventually reach the limit of their orbital range and stop moving. To prevent this, a rapid saccade-like movement called

a quick phase displaces the eyes to a new point of fixation in the direction of head rotation. If rotation is prolonged, the eyes execute alternating slow and quick phases called nystagmus (Figure 27–12). Although the slow phase is the primary

response of the rotational VOR, the direction of nystagmus is defined in clinical practice by the direction of its quick phase. Since prolonged rightward rotation excites the right horizontal canal and inhibits the left horizontal canal, leftward slow phases and a rightbeating nystagmus result. If the angular velocity of the head remains constant, the inertia of the endolymph is eventually overcome, as in the earlier coffee cup example. The cupula

relaxes and vestibular nerve discharge returns to its baseline rate. As a consequence, slow-phase velocity decays and the nystagmus stops, although the head is still rotating. In fact, the nystagmus lasts longer than would be expected based on cupular deflection. By a process called velocity storage, a brain stem network provides

a velocity signal to the oculomotor system, although the vestibular nerve no longer signals head movement. Eventually, however, the nystagmus does decay and the sense of motion vanishes in darkness. Further, the same rotation in the presence of a visual surround activates the optokinetic reflex (Chapter 35) and elicits a steady-state nystagmus pattern that is sustained indefinitely. The interactions between canal and optokinetic

09/12/20 5:01 PM
Part IV / Perception

There are two components of VORs. The rotational

VOR compensates for head rotation and receives its

input predominantly from the semicircular canals. The

translational VOR compensates for linear head movement. These two VOR responses arise from connections from vestibular nuclei neurons to the abducens, oculomotor, and trochlear nuclei (Figure 27–9). The Rotational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates for Head Rotation

## When the semicircular canals sense head rotation in one direction, the eyes rotate in the opposite direc-

tion at equal velocity in the orbits (Figure 27–11). This

compensatory eye rotation is called the vestibular slow phase, although it is not necessarily slow: The eyes may reach speeds of more than 200 degrees per second if the head's rotation is fast. During fast head movements, the VOR must act quickly to maintain stable gaze. A trisynaptic pathway, the three-neuron arc, connects each semicircular canal to the appropriate eye muscle (Figure 27–11). The rotational VOR represents a phylogenetically old reflex. Many invertebrates and all vertebrate species, from amphibians, reptiles, fish, and birds to non-

human primates, have the ability to reflexively rotate their eyes opposite to the direction of head rotation, thus keeping the visual world stable on the retina. Primary afferents from the horizontal semicircular canals send excitatory signals through the vestibular nuclei and the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the contralateral abducens nucleus (Figure 27–11). Abducens motor neurons send impulses via cranial nerve VI to excite the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. At the same time, abducens interneurons send excitatory signals to motor neurons in the contralateral oculomotor nucleus, which innervates the medial rectus muscle (see Chapter 35 for details on other projections). The three-synapse pathway illustrated in Figure 27–11 is not sufficient to elicit appropriate compensatory eye movements. This is because the afferent

signal from the semicircular canals is proportional to head velocity, while the compensatory eye movement requires eye position changes. To convert velocity to position requires temporal integration (simple calculus) that occurs through neural networks in the brain stem nuclei for most head motion speeds. However, at high rotation frequencies, the viscoelastic properties of the eyeball, eye muscles, and surrounding tissues provide an additional integration step. Thus, the rotational VOR is thought to consist of two parallel processes. The first process consists of the direct neural pathway known as the three-neuron arc (Figure 27–11).

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 640

The second neural integrator process consists of

additional parallel pathways that ensure that the cor-

rect proportion of velocity and position commands

are delivered to the oculomotor nuclei to move the eye appropriately (Figure 27–9 and see Chapter 35). Without this second indirect integrator pathway, the response to a head rotation would initially bring the eye to the correct position, but the eye would drift away from that position since the oculomotor neurons would lack the tonic input to compensate for the elastic restoring forces of the eyeball (Chapter 35). This is exactly what happens after lesions of brainstem and cerebellar structures that are thought to participate in this neural integration (eg, the prepositus hypoglossi and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal; Figure 27–9). It is generally thought that the integrator pathway is shared by all conjugate eye movement systems (saccades, smooth pursuit, and the VOR), although the direct pathway is at least partly segregated for different types of eye movements (ie, VOR, smooth pursuit, saccades). With continued head rotation, the eyes eventually reach the limit of their orbital range and stop moving. To prevent this, a rapid saccade-like movement called

a quick phase displaces the eyes to a new point of fixation in the direction of head rotation. If rotation is prolonged, the eyes execute alternating slow and quick phases called nystagmus (Figure 27–12). Although the slow phase is the primary

response of the rotational VOR, the direction of nystagmus is defined in clinical practice by the direction of its quick phase. Since prolonged rightward rotation excites the right horizontal canal and inhibits the left horizontal canal, leftward slow phases and a rightbeating nystagmus result. If the angular velocity of the head remains constant, the inertia of the endolymph is eventually overcome, as in the earlier coffee cup example. The cupula

relaxes and vestibular nerve discharge returns to its baseline rate. As a consequence, slow-phase velocity decays and the nystagmus stops, although the head is still rotating. In fact, the nystagmus lasts longer than would be expected based on cupular deflection. By a process called velocity storage, a brain stem network provides

a velocity signal to the oculomotor system, although the vestibular nerve no longer signals head movement. Eventually, however, the nystagmus does decay and the sense of motion vanishes in darkness. Further, the same rotation in the presence of a visual surround activates the optokinetic reflex (Chapter 35) and elicits a steady-state nystagmus pattern that is sustained indefinitely. The interactions between canal and optokinetic

09/12/20 5:01 PM

A Excitatory connections

Head Eyes move right Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System B Inhibitory connections Leftward eye movement inhibited

<!-- image -->

Figure 27–11 The horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex. Similar

pathways connect the anterior and posterior canals to the verti-

cal recti and oblique muscles.

A. Leftward head rotation excites hair cells in the left hori -zontal canal, thus exciting neurons that evoke rightward eye movement. The vestibular nuclei include two populations of

first-order neurons. One lies in the medial vestibular nucleus

(M); its axons cross the midline and excite neurons in the right abducens nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (P). The other population is in the lateral vestibular nucleus (L); its axons ascend ipsilaterally in the tract of Deiters and excite neurons in the left oculomotor nucleus, which project in the oculomotor nerve to the left medial rectus muscle. The right abducens nucleus has two populations of neurons. A set of motor neurons projects in the abducens nerve and excites the right lateral rectus muscle. The axons of a set of interneurons cross the midline and ascend in the left medial

longitudinal fasciculus to the oculomotor nucleus, where they

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 641

excite the neurons that project to the left medial rectus muscle.

These connections facilitate the rightward horizontal eye move-

ment that compensates for leftward head movement. Other

nuclei shown are the superior (S) and descending (D) vestibular nuclei. B. During counterclockwise head movement, leftward eye movement is inhibited by sensory fibers from the left horizontal canal. These afferent fibers excite neurons in

the medial vestibular nucleus that inhibit motor neurons

and interneurons in the left abducens nucleus. This action reduces the excitation of the motor neurons for the left lat -eral and right medial rectus muscles. The same head movement results in a decreased signal in the right horizontal canal (not shown), which has similar connections. The weak -ened signal results in decreased inhibition of the right lateral and left medial rectus muscles and decreased excitation of the left lateral and right medial rectus muscles. (Adapted from Sugiuchi et al. 2005.)

09/12/20 5:01 PM



Part IV / Perception

Quick phase Slow phase

<!-- image -->

a constant rate in the dark. At the beginning of the trace, the

eye moves slowly at the same speed as the chair (slow phase) and occasionally makes rapid resetting movements (quick phase). The speed of the slow phase gradually decreases until the eye no longer moves regularly. (Reproduced, with permission, from Leigh and Zee 2015.)

signals during rotation occurs through the velocity

storage network.

If head rotation stops abruptly, the endolymph

continues to be displaced in the same direction that the head had formerly rotated. With rightward rota-

tion, this inhibits the right horizontal canal and excites the left horizontal canal, resulting in a sensation of leftward rotation and a corresponding left-beating nystagmus. However, this occurs only in darkness. In the light, optokinetic reflexes suppress postrotatory nystagmus since there is no visual motion stimulus. The Translational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates for Linear Motion and Head Tilts

## When the head rotates, all images move with the same velocity on the retina. When the head moves sideways, however, the image of a close object moves more rap-

idly across the retina than does the image of a distant object. This can be understood easily by considering what happens when a person looks out the side window of a moving car. Objects near the side of the road move out of view almost with the speed of the car, whereas distant objects disappear more slowly. To compensate for linear head movement, the vestibular system must take into account the distance to the object being viewed—the more distant the object, the smaller the needed eye movement. During linear movements that do not involve head rotation, an appropriate translational VOR is elicited, driven by input from the otolith organs. Neurons in the vestibular nuclei, including some different from those providing the main drive to the rotational VOR, carry this signal to the extraocular motor neuron pools.

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 642

Side-to-side head movements result in a horizon

-

tal eye movement in a direction opposite to the head

movement. Vertical displacements of the body, such as

during walking or running, elicit oppositely directed vertical eye movements to stabilize gaze. However, in contrast to the rotational VOR where a head rotation is compensated by an equal but opposite eye rotation, horizontal displacement must be compensated by an eye rotation that depends on the viewed object distance, a nontrivial computation. For example, during a lateral head displacement, nearby objects move on the retina more rapidly than distant ones. So, in order to stabilize a nearby object on the retina, the eyes need to rotate by a larger amount than is needed for a distant object. Thus, the horizontal compensatory eye movements that are elicited during lateral motion scale with target distance; the closer the target, the larger is the compensatory eye movement. Similarly, as in the rotational VOR, compensatory responses to translation occur at relatively short latency (10–12 ms). Fore-aft translations produce converging and diverging eye movements that bring the eyes together or move them apart. The amount of convergence or

divergence is also dependent upon visual target distance, such that close visual objects produce large eye movements and distant visual objects produce little eye movements. Further, the amount of relative left and right eye movement is dependent upon visual object eccentricity relative to straight ahead. Unlike the rotational VOR that is a full-field image stabilization reflex, the goal of the translational VOR is to selectively stabilize visual objects on the fovea. In general, the two eyes move disjunctively, consisting of either a pure vergence movement or a combination of vergence and conjugate eye movements. In practice, although the direction of the evoked eye movement is typically consistent with geometrical predictions, the primate/ human translational VOR typically undercompensates for near-target viewing, with gains of only about 0.5. The translational VOR differs from the rotational VOR in the ability to generate compensatory eye movements during translation that optimize visual

acuity on the central retina. These abilities appear to be specific to frontal-eyed animals, such as primates. Many lateral-eyed species, like the rabbit, do not generate eye movements that compensate for the visual consequences of translation during self-motion. Because gravity exerts a constant linear acceleration force on the head, the otolith organs also sense the orientation of the head relative to gravity. When

the head tilts away from the vertical in the roll plane— around the axis running from the occiput to the nose— the eyes rotate in the opposite direction to reduce the

09/12/20 5:01 PM

tilt of the retinal image. This ocular counter-rolling

reflex—the ability to use a gravity-sensing mechanism

to maintain gaze relative to the horizon—is of para-

mount importance for lateral-eyed, afoveate species that typically lack a well-developed saccadic system. But such functional utility for these tilt responses has lost its advantage in the primate oculomotor system, where static ocular counter-rolling and counter-pitching in humans have a gain of less than 0.1. Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Are Supplemented by Optokinetic Responses

## The VORs compensate for head movement imperfectly. They are best at sensing the onset or abrupt change of motion; they compensate poorly for sustained motion

at constant speed during translation or constant angular velocity during rotation. In addition, they are insensitive to very slow rotations or low-amplitude linear accelerations. Thus, vestibular responses during prolonged motion in the light are supplemented by visual stabilization reflexes that maintain nystagmus when vestib-

ular input ceases: optokinetic nystagmus, a full-field stabilization system, and ocular following, a foveal stabilization system. Although the two classes of reflexes are distinct, their pathways overlap. The Cerebellum Adjusts the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex

## As we have seen, the VOR keeps the gaze constant when the head moves. There are times, however, when

the reflex is inappropriate. For example, when you

turn your head while walking, you want your gaze to follow. The rotational VOR, however, would prevent your eyes from turning with your head. To prevent this sort of biologically inappropriate response, the VOR is under the control of the cerebellum and cortex, which suppress the reflex during volitional head movements. In addition, the VOR must be continuously calibrated to maintain its accuracy in the face of changes within the motor system (fatigue, injury to vestibular

organs or pathways, eye-muscle weakness, or aging) and differing visual requirements (wearing corrective lenses). Indeed, the VOR is a highly modifiable reflex. The brain continuously monitors its performance by evaluating the clarity of vision during head movements. When head turns are consistently associated with image motion across the retina, the VOR undergoes gain changes in the direction appropriate to improve the compensatory ability of the reflex. For example, when viewing the world through spectacles

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 643

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


that magnify or miniaturize the visual scene, the rota-

tional VOR gain (in darkness) increases or decreases

accordingly. The reflex behavior can adapt over sev-

eral minutes, hours, and days. This is accomplished by sensory feedback that modifies the motor output. If the reflex is not working properly, the image moves across the retina. The motor command to the eye muscles must be adjusted until the gaze is again stable, rotational retinal image motion is zero, and there is no error. Anyone who wears eyeglasses depends on this plasticity of the VOR. Because lenses for nearsightedness shrink the visual image, a smaller eye rotation is

needed to compensate for a given head rotation, and the gain of the VOR must be reduced. Conversely, glasses for farsightedness magnify the image, so the VOR gain must increase during their use. More complicated is the instance of bifocal or progressive spectacles, in which the reflex must use different gains for the different magnifications. In the laboratory, the reflex can be conditioned by altering the visual consequences of head motion. For example, if a subject is rotated for a period of time while wearing magnifying glasses, the reflex gain gradually increases (Figure 27–13A). This process requires changes in synaptic transmission in both the cerebellum and the brain stem. If the flocculus and paraflocculus of the cerebellum are

lesioned, the gain of the VOR can no longer be modulated. Mossy fibers carry vestibular, visual, and motor signals from the pontine and vestibular nuclei to the cerebellar cortex; the granule cells, with their parallel fiber axons, relay these signals to the Purkinje cells (Figure 27–13B). The synaptic efficacy of parallel fiber input to a Purkinje cell could be modified by the concurrent action of climbing fiber input. Indeed, the climbing fiber input to the cerebellum carries a retinal error signal, thought to serve as a "teaching" signal enabling the cerebellum to correct the error in the VOR. This adaptation requires long-term plasticity of multiple mechanisms through multiple sites (Chapter 37). In addition to the Purkinje cell, plasticity is also found in the vestibular nuclei, in a particular class of neurons known as flocculus target neurons, which

receive GABAergic inhibitory input from Purkinje cells in the flocculus as well as direct inputs from vestibular sensory fibers. During adaptation of the VOR, these neurons change their sensitivity to the vestibular inputs in the appropriate way, and after adaptation, they can maintain those changes without further input from the cerebellum. The importance of the cerebellum in calibrating eye movements is also evident in patients with cerebellar disease, who are often characterized by a VOR response of abnormal amplitude or direction.

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

A Adaptability of the vestibulo-ocular reex

×2.0

## Spectacles

B Sites of adaptive learning ×2.0

Spectacles

<!-- image -->

## Cerebellar occulus

Parallel ber Exposure:

1st

2nd

3rd


Cerebellar

occulus

<!-- image -->

spectacles that double the speed of the retinal-image motion

## evoked by head movement. Each day, the gain of the vestibulo-

ocular reflex—the amount the eyes move for a given head movement—is tested in the dark so that the monkey cannot use retinal motion as a clue to modify the reflex. Over a period of 4 days, the gain increases gradually (left). It quickly returns to normal when the spectacles are removed (right). (Adapted, with permission, from Miles and Eighmy 1980.)

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 644

Visual

error signal

B. Adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex occurs in cerebel-

lar and brain stem circuits. A visual error signal, triggered by

motion of the retinal image during head movement, reaches

the inferior olivary nucleus. The climbing fiber transmits this error signal to the Purkinje cell, affecting the parallel fiber– Purkinje cell synapse. The Purkinje cell transmits changed information to the floccular target cell in the vestibular nucleus, changing its sensitivity to the vestibular input. After the reflex has been adapted, the Purkinje cell input is no longer necessary.

09/12/20 5:01 PM

The Thalamus and Cortex Use Vestibular Signals

for Spatial Memory and Cognitive and Perceptual

Functions

## For decades, vestibular function has been studied primarily in relation to reflexes, both vestibulo-ocular and

vestibulospinal. Yet, in the past decade, it has become

increasingly clear that the function of the vestibular system is as important for cognitive processes as for reflexes. The difficulty in understanding the vestibular system's role in spatial cognition stems from the fact that these functions are inherently multisensory, arising through convergence of vestibular, visual, somatosensory, and motor cues, following principles that remain poorly understood. Some of these perceptual functions of the vestibular system include tilt perception, visual-vertical perception, and visuospatial constancy. Tilt perception. Vestibular information is critical for spatial orientation—the perception of how our head and body are positioned relative to the outside world.

Nearly all species orient themselves using gravity, which provides a global, external reference. Thus, spatial awareness is governed by our orientation relative to gravity, collectively typically referred to as tilt. Visual-vertical perception. We commonly experience the visual scene as perceptually oriented relative to earth-vertical orientation, regardless of our spatial

orientation in the world. This ability has been studied psychophysically in humans and monkeys using tasks in which a subject is turned ear-down in the dark and asked to orient a dimly lit bar vertically in space (to align it with gravity). The results suggest that the neural representation of the visual scene is modified by static vestibular and proprioceptive signals that indicate the orientation of the head and body. Visuospatial constancy. Vestibular signals are also important for the perception of a stable visual world despite constantly changing retinal images caused by

movement of the eyes, head, and body. The projection of the scene onto the retina continuously changes because of these movements. Despite the changing retinal image, the percept of the scene as a whole remains stable; this stability is critical not only for vison but also for sensorimotor transformations (eg, to update the motor goal of an eye or arm movement). Vestibular Information Is Present in the Thalamus

Vestibular projections to the thalamus are complicated

## and overall less clear, partly because of the strong

multisensory nature of the responses in these cells

and the difficulty in comparing thalamic regions and

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 645

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


nomenclature across studies and species. Some neu-

rons in all vestibular nuclei and likely the fastigial

cerebellar nuclei project bilaterally to the thalamus,

but most fibers terminate in the contralateral thalamic nuclei (Figure 27–9). Several major thalamic regions receive vestibular projections, including the ventral posterolateral and ventral lateral thalamic nuclei and, to a lesser extent,

the ventral posteroinferior nuclei, the posterior group, and the anterior pulvinar. These nuclei are traditionally thought to also receive somatosensory input and project to the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, as well as the posterior parietal cortex (areas 5 and 7) and the insula of the temporal cortex. Vestibular Information Is Widespread in the Cortex

A number of cortical areas receiving short-latency

## vestibular signals either alone or more commonly in concert with proprioceptive, tactile, oculomotor, vis-

ual, and auditory signals have been identified (Figure 27–14). Although vestibular signals are widely distributed to a number of cortical regions, all such regions are multimodal and none seems to represent a purely vestibular cortex, similar to other modalities such as vision, proprioception, and audition. Vestibular modulation has been established in the lateral sulcus (parietoinsular vestibular cortex), somatosensory cortex (areas 3a and 2v), oculomotor cortex

(frontal and supplementary eye fields), extrastriate visual motion cortex (dorsal medial superior temporal area), and parietal cortex (ventral intraparietal area and area 7a). In the primary somatosensory cortex, area 2v lies at the base of the intraparietal sulcus just posterior to the areas of the postcentral gyrus representing the hand and mouth. Electrical stimulation of area 2v in humans produces sensations of whole-body motion. Area 3a lies at the base of the central sulcus, adjacent to the motor cortex. Many cells in the parietoinsular vestibular cortex are multisensory, responding to body motion, somatosensory, proprioceptive, and visual motion stimuli. Patients with lesions in this region report episodes of vertigo, unsteadiness, and a loss of perception for visual vertical. Neurons in the medial intraparietal and medial superior temporal areas respond to both visual (optic flow) and vestibular signals. These cells utilize multisensory cue integration (Bayesian) frameworks to assist in the cognitive perception of motion through space. Imaging studies reveal an even larger portion of cerebral cortex involved in processing vestibular information, including the temporoparietal cor-

tex and the insula, the superior parietal lobe, the

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

A Monkey

Periarcuate Frontal eye eld somatosensory and proprioceptive systems, as well as evoke postural and oculomotor responses, which might in turn result in increased cortical activations.

<!-- image -->

Area 7a Area 7b Vestibular Signals Are Essential for Spatial Orientation and Spatial Navigation

MST

## VPS PIVC Our ability to move about depends on a stable directional orientation. Certain cells in the thalamus, hippocampal region, entorhinal cortex, and subiculum are

Posterior

parietal cortex 7, VIP, MIP, MST PIVC involved in navigation tasks. Damage to these areas impairs a variety of spatial and directional abilities. At least six cell types contributing to spatial orientation have been identified, including place cells, grid cells, head direction cells, border cells, speed cells, and conjunctive cells. In the hippocampus, place cells discharge relative to the animal's location in the environment (Chapter 54). Head direction cells in the dorsal thalamus, parahippocampal regions, and several regions of the cortex indicate the animal's heading direction like a compass. Grid cells in the entorhinal cortex respond to multiple spatial locations in a unique triangular grid pattern. Border cells in the entorhinal cortex signal environmental boundaries, speed cells discharge in proportion to the animal's running speed, and conjunctive cells exhibit a combination of several of these properties. These regions are intimately connected and appear to work together in a "navigation network" to provide for spatial orientation, spatial memory, and our ability

ebral cortex in which vestibular responses have been recorded.

Areas in monkey cortex include periarcuate cortex, area 6, fron-

tal eye fields, areas 3a and 2v, ventral intraparietal area (VIP), medial intraparietal area (MIP), area 7, visual posterior sylvian area (VPS), medial superior temporal area (MST), parieto-insular vestibular cortex (PIVC), and the hippocampal formation. B. In the human cortex, areas recording vestibular activity include 6v, frontal eye fields (FEF), superior frontal gyrus, 2v, 3a, posterior parietal cortex, PIVC, and the hippocampal

formation. pre- and postcentral gyri, anterior cingulate and pos- to move through our surroundings. Think of walking through your house, driving to the store, or knowing which direction to go in a new city. Lesions of central vestibular networks disrupt head direction, place, and grid responses. Patients with disease or trauma to the vestibular system, hippocampus, and anterior thalamus regions often exhibit severe deficits in their ability to orient in familiar environments or even find their way home. All of these cells depend on a functioning vestibular system to maintain their spatial orientation properties. The pathway by which vestibular signals reach

terior middle temporal gyri, premotor and frontal

cortices, inferior parietal lobule, putamen, and hip-

pocampal regions. Using electrical stimulation of the vestibular nerve in patients activates the prefrontal lobe and anterior portion of the supplementary motor area at relatively short latencies. However, imaging and, to a lesser extent, single-cell recording studies may overstate the range of vestibular representations. In particular, vestibular stimuli often co-activate the

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 646

the navigation network and the computational principles determining how vestibular cues influence these spatially tuned cells is not well understood. We know that there are at least three different influences: Semi -circular canal signals contribute to the estimate of head direction; gravity signals influence the three-dimensional properties of head direction cells; and translation signals influence the estimate of linear speed, which controls both grid cell properties and the magnitude and frequency of theta oscillations in the hippocampal network. What is clear is that there is no evidence

09/12/20 5:01 PM

Area 6

Area 3a Area 2v VIP, MIP

linking vestibular nuclei response properties directly

to head direction or other spatially tuned cell types,

and no direct projections from the vestibular nuclei to

the brain areas thought to house these spatially tuned neurons have been identified. Furthermore, vestibular nuclei responses are inappropriate for driving these spatially tuned cells, as these signals need to encompass the total head movement, rather than individual components during active or passive head movement. It has long been recognized that proprioceptive and motor efference cues should participate, together with vestibular signals, to track head direction over

time. It has been proposed that internally generated information from vestibular, proprioceptive, and motor efference cues can be utilized to keep track of changes in directional heading. More recent insights have started to shed light on how each of these cues contributes to the final self-motion estimate that can be precisely predicted and quantitatively estimated based on a Bayesian framework. Although as yet difficult to define, quantitative internal models govern the relationship of vestibular and other multisensory self-motion cues for computing the spatial properties of navigation circuit cells. Clinical Syndromes Elucidate Normal

Vestibular Function

## As we have seen, rotation excites hair cells in the semicircular canal whose hair bundles are oriented in the

direction of motion and inhibits those in the canals ori

ented away from the motion direction. This imbalance in vestibular signals is responsible for the compensatory eye movements and the sensation of rotation that accompanies head movement. It can also originate from disease of one labyrinth or vestibular nerve, which results in a pattern of afferent vestibular signaling analogous to that stemming from rotation away from the side of the lesion, that is, more discharge from the intact side. There is accordingly a strong feeling of spinning, called vertigo. Caloric Irrigation as a Vestibular Diagnostic Tool

Nystagmus can be used as a diagnostic indicator of

## vestibular system integrity. In patients complaining of dizziness or vertigo, the function of the ves-

tibular labyrinth is typically assessed by a caloric test (Figure 27–15). Either warm (44°C) or cold (30°C) water is introduced into the external auditory canal. In normal persons, warm water induces nystagmus that beats toward the ear into which the water has been

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 647

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


introduced, whereas cold water induces nystagmus

that beats away from the ear into which the water has

been introduced. This relationship is encapsulated in

the mnemonic COWS: Cold water produces nystagmus beating to the Opposite side; Warm water produces nystagmus beating to the Same side. In normal persons, the two ears give equal responses. If there is a unilateral lesion in the vestibular pathway, however, nystagmus will be induced and directed toward the side opposite the lesion. The vertigo and nystagmus resulting from an acute vestibular lesion typically subside over several days, even if peripheral function does not recover. This

is because central compensatory mechanisms restore the balance in vestibular signals in the brain stem, even when peripheral input is permanently lost or unbalanced. The loss of input from one labyrinth also means that all vestibular reflexes must be driven by a single labyrinth. For the VOR, this condition is quite effec-

-tive at low speeds because the intact labyrinth can be both excited and inhibited. However, during rapid, high-frequency rotations, inhibition is not sufficient, such that the gain of the reflex is reduced when the head rotates toward the lesioned side. This is the basis of an important clinical test of canal function, the headimpulse test. In this test, the head is moved rapidly one time along the axis of rotation of a single canal. If there is a significant decrease in gain owing to canal dysfunction, the movement of the eyes will lag behind that of the head, and there will be a visible catch-up saccade. Bilateral Vestibular Hypofunction Interferes With Normal Vision

## Vestibular function is sometimes lost simultaneously on both sides, for example, from ototoxicity owing to

aminoglycoside antibiotics such as gentamicin or can-

cer treatment medications such as cisplatin. The symptoms of bilateral vestibular hypofunction are different from those of unilateral loss. First, vertigo is absent because there is no imbalance in vestibular signals; input is reduced equally from both sides. For the same reason, there is no spontaneous nystagmus. In fact, these patients may have no symptoms when they are at rest and the head is still. In humans, receptor and nerve fiber loss due to disease, trauma, or ototoxicity is permanent. However, in other animal classes such as amphibians, rep-

tiles, and birds, spontaneous regeneration does occur over time. Although the differences in regeneration between animal groups is not yet understood, recent

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Part IV / Perception

Figure 27–15 Bithermal caloric test of the vestibulo-

ocular reflex.  The vestibular caloric test remains the

primary test used today in clinics around the world to

determine if there is system dysfunction. The head is elevated 30° to align the horizontal semicircular canals with gravity. A. Cold water or air introduced into the right ear causes a downward convection current in the endolymph, producing an inhibitory response in the right ear hair cells

and afferent fibers. The result is a leftward (opposite side) beating nystagmus (as determined by fast phase direction). B. Warm water or air introduced into the right ear produces an upward endolymph movement, producing an excitatory response in the hair cells and afferents. The

result is a rightward (same side) beating nystagmus.

Inhibitory

response Middle ear space

<!-- image -->

research shows promise for the future development of

regenerative treatments in humans.

For the present, the loss of vestibular reflexes is

devastating. A physician who lost his vestibular hair cells because of a toxic reaction to streptomycin wrote

a dramatic account of this loss. Immediately after the onset of streptomycin toxicity, he could not read without steadying his head to keep it motionless. Even after partial recovery, he could not read signs or recognize friends while walking in the street; he had to stop to see clearly. Some patients may even "see" their heartbeat if the VOR fails to compensate for the miniscule head movements that accompany each arterial pulse.

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 648

Highlights

1. The vestibular system provides the brain with

a rapid estimate of head movement. Vestibular

signals are used for balance, visual stability, spa-

- tial orientation, movement planning, and motion perception. 2. Vestibular receptor hair cells are mechanotransducers that sense rotational and linear accelera -tions. Through kinematic and neural processing
- mechanisms, movements are transformed into acceleration, velocity, and position signals. These signals are used throughout the brain efficiently and quickly to guide behavior and cognition.

09/12/20 5:01 PM

A

Ampulla Right ear External auditory meatus Leftward nystagmus Rightward nystagmus

3.

Receptor cells are polarized to detect the direc-

tion of motion. Three semicircular canals in each

inner ear detect rotational motion and work in

- bilateral synergistic pairs through convergent commissural pathways in the vestibular nuclei. Two otolith organs in each ear detect linear translations and tilts relative to gravity. 4. Vestibular nuclei neurons receive converging multisensory and motor signals from visual, proprioceptive, cerebellar, and cortical sources. The
- multisensory integration allows for discrimination between active and passive body motion, as well as appropriate motor responses for reactive or volitional behavior. 5. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the oculomotor system allow eye muscles to compensate for head movement through the vestibulo-ocular reflex
- to hold the image of the external world motionless on the retina. Cortical projections to the vestibular and oculomotor nuclei allow volitional eye movements to be separated from reflex eye movements but work through a final common pathway. Motor learning through vestibulocerebellar networks provides compensatory changes in eye movement responses to changing visual conditions through the use of spectacles, disease, or aging. 6. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to motor areas and the spinal cord facilitate postural stability. Gaze stability coordinates eye and neck
- movements through the medial vestibulospinal pathway. Postural control is exerted through the lateral vestibulospinal pathway. 7. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the rostral and caudal medulla nuclei are involved in regulation of blood pressure, heart rate, respira-
- tion, bone remodeling, and homeostasis. 8. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to thalamus and cortex ensure spatial orientation and influence spatial perception more generally.
9. Vestibular signals processed in the hippocampal regions are crucial for spatial location and navigation functions.
10. Vestibular signals are combined with visual signals in several cortical regions through Bayesian cue integration to provide motion perception.
11. Disease or trauma to the vestibular system can produce nausea, vertigo, dizziness, balance disorders, visual instability, and spatial confusion.
12. We are only beginning to appreciate the role of the vestibular system in cognition. However, it is clear that vestibular signals contribute to our
- perception of self, conception of body presence, and memory.

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 649

13.

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


New approaches in computation and theory

promise to provide the lapidary keys needed to

unlock our understanding of how vestibular sig-

- nals contribute to the essence of brain function.

J. David Dickman

Dora Angelaki

Selected Reading

Baloh RW, Honrubia V. 1990. Clinical Neurology of the Vestibular

System, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: FA Davis.

Beitz AJ, Anderson JH. 2000. Neurochemistry of the Vestibular

- System. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. Goldberg JM, Wilson VJ, Cullen KE, et al. 2012. The Vestibular
- System: A Sixth Sense. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Leigh RJ, Zee DS. 2015 . The Neurology of Eye Movements
- 5th ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
- References

Angelaki DE, Cullen KE. 2008. Vestibular system: the

many facets of a multimodal sense. Ann Rev Neurosci

31:125–150.

- Angelaki DE, Shaikh AG, Green AM, Dickman JD. 2004. Neurons compute internal models of the physical laws of motion. Nature 430:560–564.
- Brandt T, Dieterich M. 1999. The vestibular cortex. Its locations, functions, and disorders. Ann N Y Acad Sci 871:293–312.
- Clark BJ, Taube JS. 2012. Vestibular and attractor network basis of the head direction cell signal in subcortical circuits. Front Neural Circuits 6:1–12.
- Crèmer PD, Halmagyi GM, Aw ST, et al. 1998. Semicircular canal plane head impulses detect absent function of individual semicircular canals. Brain 121:699–716.
- Cullen KE, Roy JE. 2004. Signal processing in the vestibular system during active versus passive head movements. J Neurophys 91:1919–1933.
- Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. 1992. Behavioral and neural correlates of vestibular compensation. Behav Clin Neurol 1:345–372.
- Dickman JD, Angelaki DE. 2002. Vestibular convergence patterns in vestibular nuclei neurons of alert primates. J Neurophys 88:3518–3533.
- Dieterich M, Brandt T. 1995. Vestibulo-ocular reflex. Curr Opin Neurol 8:83–88. Distler C, Mustari MJ, Hoffmann KP. 2002. Cortical projec-
- tions to the nucleus of the optic tract and dorsal terminal nucleus and to the dorsolateral pontine nucleus in

09/12/20 5:01 PM

,
3.

Receptor cells are polarized to detect the direc-

tion of motion. Three semicircular canals in each

inner ear detect rotational motion and work in

- bilateral synergistic pairs through convergent commissural pathways in the vestibular nuclei. Two otolith organs in each ear detect linear translations and tilts relative to gravity. 4. Vestibular nuclei neurons receive converging multisensory and motor signals from visual, proprioceptive, cerebellar, and cortical sources. The
- multisensory integration allows for discrimination between active and passive body motion, as well as appropriate motor responses for reactive or volitional behavior. 5. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the oculomotor system allow eye muscles to compensate for head movement through the vestibulo-ocular reflex
- to hold the image of the external world motionless on the retina. Cortical projections to the vestibular and oculomotor nuclei allow volitional eye movements to be separated from reflex eye movements but work through a final common pathway. Motor learning through vestibulocerebellar networks provides compensatory changes in eye movement responses to changing visual conditions through the use of spectacles, disease, or aging. 6. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to motor areas and the spinal cord facilitate postural stability. Gaze stability coordinates eye and neck
- movements through the medial vestibulospinal pathway. Postural control is exerted through the lateral vestibulospinal pathway. 7. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the rostral and caudal medulla nuclei are involved in regulation of blood pressure, heart rate, respira-
- tion, bone remodeling, and homeostasis. 8. Projections from the vestibular nuclei to thalamus and cortex ensure spatial orientation and influence spatial perception more generally.
9. Vestibular signals processed in the hippocampal regions are crucial for spatial location and navigation functions.
10. Vestibular signals are combined with visual signals in several cortical regions through Bayesian cue integration to provide motion perception.
11. Disease or trauma to the vestibular system can produce nausea, vertigo, dizziness, balance disorders, visual instability, and spatial confusion.
12. We are only beginning to appreciate the role of the vestibular system in cognition. However, it is clear that vestibular signals contribute to our
- perception of self, conception of body presence, and memory.

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 649

13.

Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System


New approaches in computation and theory

promise to provide the lapidary keys needed to

unlock our understanding of how vestibular sig-

- nals contribute to the essence of brain function.

J. David Dickman

Dora Angelaki

Selected Reading

Baloh RW, Honrubia V. 1990. Clinical Neurology of the Vestibular

System, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: FA Davis.

Beitz AJ, Anderson JH. 2000. Neurochemistry of the Vestibular

- System. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. Goldberg JM, Wilson VJ, Cullen KE, et al. 2012. The Vestibular
- System: A Sixth Sense. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Leigh RJ, Zee DS. 2015 . The Neurology of Eye Movements
- 5th ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
- References

Angelaki DE, Cullen KE. 2008. Vestibular system: the

many facets of a multimodal sense. Ann Rev Neurosci

31:125–150.

- Angelaki DE, Shaikh AG, Green AM, Dickman JD. 2004. Neurons compute internal models of the physical laws of motion. Nature 430:560–564.
- Brandt T, Dieterich M. 1999. The vestibular cortex. Its locations, functions, and disorders. Ann N Y Acad Sci 871:293–312.
- Clark BJ, Taube JS. 2012. Vestibular and attractor network basis of the head direction cell signal in subcortical circuits. Front Neural Circuits 6:1–12.
- Crèmer PD, Halmagyi GM, Aw ST, et al. 1998. Semicircular canal plane head impulses detect absent function of individual semicircular canals. Brain 121:699–716.
- Cullen KE, Roy JE. 2004. Signal processing in the vestibular system during active versus passive head movements. J Neurophys 91:1919–1933.
- Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. 1992. Behavioral and neural correlates of vestibular compensation. Behav Clin Neurol 1:345–372.
- Dickman JD, Angelaki DE. 2002. Vestibular convergence patterns in vestibular nuclei neurons of alert primates. J Neurophys 88:3518–3533.
- Dieterich M, Brandt T. 1995. Vestibulo-ocular reflex. Curr Opin Neurol 8:83–88. Distler C, Mustari MJ, Hoffmann KP. 2002. Cortical projec-
- tions to the nucleus of the optic tract and dorsal terminal nucleus and to the dorsolateral pontine nucleus in

09/12/20 5:01 PM

,


Part IV / Perception

macaques: a dual retrograde tracing study. J Comp Neurol

444:144–158.

Einstein A. 1908. Über das Relativitätsprinzip und die aus

demselben gezogenen Folgerungen. Jahrbuch Radioaktiv Electronik 4:411–462.

- Fernandez C, Goldberg JM. 1971. Physiology of peripheral neurons innervating semicircular canals of the squirrel monkey. II. Response to sinusoidal stimulation and
- dynamics of peripheral vestibular system. J Neurophysiol 34:661–675. Fernandez C, Goldberg JM. 1976a. Physiology of peripheral neurons innervating otolith organs of the squirrel monkey. I. Response to static tilts and to long-duration cen-
- trifugal force. J Neurophysiol 39:970–984. Fernandez C, Goldberg JM. 1976b. Physiology of peripheral neurons innervating otolith organs of the squirrel monkey. II. Directional selectivity and force-response relations.
- J Neurophysiol 39:985–995. Flock Å. 1965. Transducing mechanisms in the lateral line canal organ receptors. Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 30:133–145.
- Fukushima K. 1997. Corticovestibular interactions: anatomy, electrophysiology, and functional considerations. Exp Brain Res 117:1–16.
- Gacek RR, Lyon M. 1974. The localization of vestibular efferent neurons in the kitten with horseradish peroxidase. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 77:92–101.
- Goldberg JM, Fernández C. 1971. Physiology of peripheral neurons innervating semicircular canals of the squirrel monkey. I. Resting discharge and response to constant
- angular accelerations. J Neurophysiol 34:635–660. Goldberg ME, Colby CL. 1992. Oculomotor control and spatial processing. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2:198–202. Grüsser OJ, Pause M, Schreiter U. 1990. Localization and
- responses of neurons in the parieto-insular vestibular cortex of awake monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). J Physiol
- (Lond) 430:537–557. Gu Y, Watkins PV, Angelaki DE, DeAngelis GC. 2006. Visual and nonvisual contributions to three-dimensional head ing selectivity in the medial superior temporal area.
- J Neurosci 26:73–85.

Kandel-Ch27\_0629-0650.indd 650

Hillman DE, McLaren JW. 1979. Displacement configuration

of semicircular canal cupulae. Neuroscience 4:1989–2000.

Hudspeth AJ, Corey DP. 1977. Sensitivity, polarity, and conduct-

- ance change in the response of vertebrate hair cells to controlled mechanical stimuli. Proc Nat Acad Sci 74:2407–2411.
- Iurato S. 1967. Submicroscopic Structure of the Inner Ear. Oxford: Pergamon Press. Laurens J, Kim H, Dickman JD, Angelaki DE. 2016. Grav-
- ity orientation tuning in macaque anterior thalamus. Nat Neurosci 19:1566–1568.
- Miles FA, Eighmy BB. 1980. Long-term adaptive changes in primate vestibuloocular reflex. I. Behavioral observations. J Neurophysiol 43:1406–1425.
- Moser EI, Moser MB. 2008. A metric for space. Hippocampus 18:1142–1156. Mustari MJ, Fuchs AF. 1990. Discharge patterns of neurons in
- the pretectal nucleus of the optic tract (NOT) in the behaving primate. J Neurophysiol 64:77–90.
- Newlands SD, Vrabec JT, Purcell IM, Stewart CM, Zimmerman BE, Perachio AA. 2003. Central projections of the saccular and utricular nerves in macaques. J Comp Neurol
- 466:31–47. O'Keefe J. 1976. Place units in the hippocampus of the freely moving rat. Exp Neurol 51:78–109. Raymond JL, Lisberger SG. 1998. Neural learning rules for
- the vestibulo-ocular reflex. J Neurosci 18:9112–9129. Spoendlin H. 1966. Ultrastructure of the vestibular sense
- organ. In: RJ Wolfson (ed). The Vestibular System and Its Diseases, pp. 39–68. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania
- Press. Sugiuchi Y, Izawa Y, Ebata S, Shinoda Y. 2005. Vestibular cortical areas in the periarcuate cortex: its afferent and efferent projections. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1039:111–123.
- Taube JS. 1995. Head direction cells recorded in the anterior thalamic nuclei of freely moving rats. J Neurosci 15:70–86. Waespe W, Henn V. 1977. Neuronal activity in the vestibular
- nuclei of the alert monkey during vestibular and optokinetic stimulation. Exp Brain Res 27:523–538.
- -Watanuki K, Schuknecht HF. 1976. A morphological study of human vestibular sensory epithelia. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 102:583–588.

09/12/20 5:01 PM


Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

Sounds Convey Multiple Types of Information to

Hearing Animals

The Neural Representation of Sound in Central Pathways

## Begins in the Cochlear Nuclei The Cochlear Nerve Delivers Acoustic Information

## in Parallel Pathways to the Tonotopically Organized Cochlear Nuclei

The Ventral Cochlear Nucleus Extracts Temporal and Spectral Information About Sounds The Dorsal Cochlear Nucleus Integrates Acoustic With

Somatosensory Information in Making Use of Spectral Cues for Localizing Sounds

The Superior Olivary Complex in Mammals Contains Separate Circuits for Detecting Interaural Time and Intensity Differences

## The Medial Superior Olive Generates a Map of Interaural Time Differences The Lateral Superior Olive Detects Interaural Intensity

Differences The Superior Olivary Complex Provides Feedback

to the Cochlea Ventral and Dorsal Nuclei of the Lateral Lemniscus

Shape Responses in the Inferior Colliculus With Inhibition

Afferent Auditory Pathways Converge in the Inferior Colliculus Sound Location Information From the Inferior Colliculus

## Creates a Spatial Map of Sound in the Superior Colliculus The Inferior Colliculus Transmits Auditory Information to

the Cerebral Cortex Stimulus Selectivity Progressively Increases Along the

## Ascending Pathway The Auditory Cortex Maps Numerous Aspects of Sound

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 651

A Second Sound-Localization Pathway From the Inferior

Colliculus Involves the Cerebral Cortex in Gaze Control

Auditory Circuits in the Cerebral Cortex Are Segregated

Into Separate Processing Streams The Cerebral Cortex Modulates Sensory Processing in

Subcortical Auditory Areas The Cerebral Cortex Forms Complex Sound Representations

The Auditory Cortex Uses Temporal and Rate Codes to Represent Time-Varying Sounds

## Primates Have Specialized Cortical Neurons That Encode

Pitch and Harmonics Insectivorous Bats Have Cortical Areas Specialized for

Behaviorally Relevant Features of Sound The Auditory Cortex Is Involved in Processing Vocal

Feedback During Speaking Highlights

H

earing is crucial for localizing and iden

-

tifying sound; for humans, it is particularly

important because of its role in the understand-

ing and production of speech. The auditory system has several noteworthy features. Its subcortical pathway is longer than that of other sensory systems. Unlike the visual system, sounds can enter the auditory system from all directions, day and night, when we are asleep as well as when we are awake. The auditory system processes not only sounds emanating from outside the body (environmental sounds, sounds generated by others) but also self-generated sounds (vocalizations and chewing sounds). The location of sound stimuli in space is not conveyed by the spatial arrangement of

09/12/20 5:02 PM


Part IV / Perception

sensory afferent neurons but is instead computed by

the auditory system from representations of the physi-

cal cues.

Sounds Convey Multiple Types of Information

to Hearing Animals

## Hearing helps to alert animals to the presence of unseen dangers or opportunities and, in many species,

also serves as a means for communication. Information because in mammals the shape of the external ear differs back-to-front as well as top-to-bottom. Animals learn to use these spectral cues to locate sound sources. If the shape of the ear is experimentally altered, even adult humans can learn to make use of a new pattern of spectral cues. If animals lose hearing in one ear, they lose interaural timing and intensity cues and must depend completely on spectral cues for localizing sounds. How do we make sense of the complex and changing sounds that we hear? Most natural sounds contain energy over a wide range of frequencies and change

about where sounds arise and what they mean must be extracted from the representations of the physical characteristics of sound at each of the ears. To under stand how animals process sound, it is useful first to consider which cues are available. Most vertebrates take advantage of having two ears for localizing sounds in the horizontal plane. Sound sources at different positions in that plane affect

the two ears differentially: Sound arrives earlier and is more intense at the ear nearer the source (Figure 28–1A). Interaural time and intensity differences carry information about where sounds arise. The size of the head determines how interaural time delays are related to the location of sound sources; the neuronal circuitry determines the precision with

-rapidly with time. The information used to recognize sounds varies among animal species, and depends on listening conditions and experience. Human speech, for example, can be understood in the midst of noise, over electronic devices that distort sounds, and even through cochlear implants. One reason for its robustness is that speech contains redundant cues: The vocal apparatus produces sounds in which multiple parameters covary. At the same time, this makes the task of understanding how animals recognize patterns a complicated one. It is not clear which cues are used by animals under various conditions. Music is a source of pleasure to human beings. Musical instruments and human voices produce sounds that have energy at the fundamental frequency

which time delays are resolved. Because air pressure waves travel at roughly 340 m/s in air, the maximal interaural delay in humans is approximately 600 μs; in small birds, the greatest delay is only 35 μs. Humans can resolve the location of a sound source directly ahead to within approximately 1 degree, corresponding to an interaural time difference of 10 μs. Interaural time differences are particularly well conveyed by neurons that encode relatively low frequencies. These neurons can fire at the same position in every cycle of the sound and in this way encode the interaural time difference as an interaural phase difference. Sounds of high frequencies produce sound shadows or intensity differences between the two ears. For many mammals with small heads, high-frequency sounds provide the primary cue for localizing sound in the horizontal plane. Mammals can localize sounds in the vertical plane and with a single ear using spectral filtering. Highfrequency sounds, with wavelengths that are close to

or smaller than the dimensions of the head, shoulders, and external ears, interact with those parts of the body to produce constructive and destructive interference, introducing broad spectral peaks and deep, narrow spectral notches whose frequency changes with the location of the sound (Figure 28–1B). High-frequency sounds from different origins are filtered differently

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 652

that corresponds to its perceived pitch, as well as at multiples of that frequency, giving sounds a quality that allows us, for example, to distinguish a flute from a violin when their pitch is the same. Musical pitches are largely in the low-frequency range in which auditory nerve fibers fire in phase with sounds. In music, sounds are combined simultaneously to produce chords and successively to produce melodies. Euphonious, pleasant chords elicit regular, periodic firing in cochlear nerve fibers. In dissonant sounds, there is less regularity both in the sound itself and in the firing of auditory nerve fibers; the component frequencies are so close that they interfere with one another instead of periodically reinforcing one another. The Neural Representation of Sound in Central

Pathways Begins in the Cochlear Nuclei

## The neural pathways that process acoustic information extend from the ear to the brain stem, through the

midbrain and thalamus, to the cerebral cortex (Figure

28–2). Acoustic information is conveyed from cells in the cochlear ganglion (see Figure 26–17) to the cochlear nuclei in the brain stem. There information is received by several different types of neurons, most of which are arranged tonotopically.

09/12/20 5:02 PM

A Sound localization using interaural difference Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System B Sound localization using spectral ltering

<!-- image -->



–20

<!-- image -->

Figure 28–1 Cues for localizing sound sources in the hori-

A. Interaural time and intensity differences are cues for local-

izing sound sources in the horizontal plane, or azimuth. A sound arising in the horizontal plane arrives differently at the two

ears: Sounds arrive earlier and are louder at the ear nearer the

source. A sound that arises directly in the front or back travels the same distance to the right and left ears and thus arrives at both ears simultaneously. Interaural time and intensity do not vary with the movement of sound sources in the vertical plane, so it is impossible to localize a pure sinusoidal tone in the vertical plane. In humans, the maximal interaural time difference is approximately 600 μs. High-frequency sounds, with short wavelengths, are deflected by the head, producing a sound shadow on the far side. (Adapted, with permission, from Geisler 1998.) B. Mammals can localize broadband sounds in both the vertical and horizontal planes on the basis of spectral filtering. When a noise that has equal energy at all frequencies over the human

hearing range (white noise) is presented through a speaker, the ear, head, and shoulders cancel energy at some frequencies and enhance others. The white noise that is emitted from the speaker has a flat power spectrum, but by the time the noise The axons of the different types of neurons take

different routes to the brain stem and midbrain,

where they terminate on separate targets. Some of the

pathways from the cochlear nuclei to the contralateral inferior colliculus are direct; others involve one or two synaptic stages in brain stem auditory nuclei. From the bilateral inferior colliculi, acoustic information

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 653




Frequency (kHz)

Vertical

plane

has reached the bottom of the ear canal, its spectrum is no

longer flat.

In the figure, the sound energy at each frequency at the

eardrum relative to that of the white noise is shown by the traces beside each speaker; these traces plot the relative sound magnitude in decibels against spectral frequency

(head-related transfer function). The small plot in the upper right compares two head-related transfer functions: one for a noise that arises low and in front of a listener (blue) and one for a noise from behind the listener's head (brown). Head-related transfer functions have deep notches at frequencies greater than 8 kHz, whose frequencies vary depending on where the sounds arose. Sounds that lack energy at high frequencies and narrowband sounds are difficult to localize in the vertical plane. Since spectral filtering also varies in the horizontal plane, it provides the only location cue to animals that have lost hearing in one ear. You can test the salience of these spectral cues with a simple experiment. Close your eyes as a friend jingles keys directly in front of you at various elevations. Compare your ability to localize sounds under normal conditions and when you distort the

shape of both ears by pushing them with your fingers from the back. (Data from D. Kistler and F. Wightman.)

flows two ways: to the ipsilateral superior colliculus,

where it participates in orienting the head and eyes

in response to sounds, and to the ipsilateral thala-

mus, the relay to auditory areas of the cerebral cortex. The afferent auditory pathways from the periphery to higher brain regions include efferent feedback at many levels.

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Magnitude (dB)


Part IV / Perception

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 654

Primary auditory

Medial geniculate nucleus Figure 28–2 The central auditory pathways extend from the brain stem through the midbrain and thalamus to the auditory cortex.  The fibers in the cochlear nerve

(cranial nerve VIII) terminate in the cochlear nuclei of the brain stem. The neurons of these nuclei project in several parallel pathways to the inferior colliculus. Their axons exit through the trapezoid body, intermediate acoustic stria, or dorsal acoustic stria. Some cells terminate directly in the inferior colliculus. Others contact cells in the superior olivary complex and in the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, which in turn project to the inferior colliculus. Neurons of the inferior colliculus project to the superior colliculus and to the medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. Thalamic neurons project to the auditory cortex. The cochlear nuclei and the ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus are the only central auditory neurons that receive monaural input. (Adapted, with permission, from Brodal 1981.)

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

The Cochlear Nerve Delivers Acoustic Information


pathway. Three types of neurons are intermingled

in Parallel Pathways to the Tonotopically Organized

Cochlear Nuclei

## The afferent nerve fibers from cochlear ganglion cells are bundled in the cochlear or auditory component of

the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII) and

terminate exclusively in the cochlear nuclei. The cochlear nerve in mammals contains two groups of fibers: a large number (95%) of myelinated fibers that receives input from inner hair cells and a small number (5%) of unmyelinated fibers that receive input from outer hair cells. The larger, more numerous, myelinated fibers are much better understood than the unmyelinated fibers. Each type detects energy over a narrow range

of frequencies; the tonotopic array of cochlear nerve fibers thus carries detailed information about how the frequency content of sounds varies from moment to moment. The unmyelinated fibers terminate both on the large neurons in the ventral cochlear nuclei and also on the small granule cells that surround the ventral cochlear nuclei. Because it is difficult to record from these tiny fibers, the information they convey to the brain is not well understood. The unmyelinated fibers integrate information from a relatively wide region of the cochlea but are not responsive to sound. It has been suggested that these fibers respond to cochlear damage and contribute to hyperacusis—pain after exposure to loud sounds that damages the cochlea. Two features of the cochlear nuclei are important. First, these nuclei are organized tonotopically. Fibers that carry information from the apical end of the

cochlea, which detects low frequencies, terminate ventrally in the ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei; those that carry information from the basal end of the cochlea, which detects high frequencies, terminate dorsally (Figure 28–3). Second, each cochlear nerve fiber innervates several different areas within the cochlear nuclei, contacting various types of neurons that have distinct projection patterns to higher auditory centers. As a result, the auditory pathway comprises at least four parallel ascending pathways that simultaneously extract different acoustic information from the signals carried by cochlear nerve fibers. Parallel circuits are a general feature of vertebrate sensory systems. The Ventral Cochlear Nucleus Extracts Temporal

and Spectral Information About Sounds

## The principal cells of the unlayered ventral cochlear nucleus sharpen temporal and spectral information and convey it to higher centers of the auditory

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 655

and form separate pathways through the brain stem

(Figure 28–4).

Bushy cells project bilaterally to the superior olivary complex. This pathway has two parts. One courses through the medial superior olive and com-

pares the time of arrival of sounds at the two ears; the other travels through the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body and the lateral superior olive and compares interaural intensity. Large spherical bushy cells sense low frequencies and project bilaterally to the medial superior olive, forming a circuit that detects interaural time delay and contributes to the localization of lowfrequency sounds in the horizontal plane. The small spherical bushy cells and globular bushy cells sense higher frequencies. Small spherical bushy cells excite the lateral superior olive ipsilaterally. The globular bushy cells, through calyceal endings, excite neurons in the contralateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid body that in turn inhibit principal cells of the lateral superior olive. Neurons in the lateral superior olive integrate the ipsilateral excitation and contralateral inhibition to measure interaural intensity and to localize sources of high-frequency sounds in the horizontal plane (see Figure 28–6). Stellate cells terminate widely. They excite neurons in the ipsilateral dorsal cochlear nucleus, the medial olivocochlear efferent neurons in the ventral nucleus

of the trapezoid body, the periolivary nuclei in the vicinity of the ipsilateral lateral superior olive, and the contralateral ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, inferior colliculus, and thalamus. The tonotopic array of stellate cells encodes the spectrum of sounds. Octopus cells excite targets in the contralateral paraolivary nucleus and terminate in large excitatory calyceal endings on neurons of the ventral nucleus of

the lateral lemniscus, which in turn provide sharply timed glycinergic inhibition to the inferior colliculus. Octopus cells detect onsets of sounds that allow animals to detect brief gaps. They mark the spectral components that come from one source that necessarily start together. The differences in the integrative tasks performed by these pathways through the ventral cochlear nucleus are reflected in cell morphology. The shapes of

their dendrites reflect the way they collect information from cochlear nerve fibers. The dendrites of the sharply tuned bushy and stellate cells receive input from relatively few cochlear nerve fibers, whereas those of the broadly tuned octopus cells, in contrast, lie perpendicular to the path of cochlear nerve fibers, poised to receive input from many cochlear nerve fibers. Many of the inputs to bushy cells are from unusually large

09/12/20 5:02 PM


B

schematically uncoiled basilar membrane at three positions, Dorsal

exciting distinct populations of hair cells and their afferent

<!-- image -->

nerve fibers. B. Cochlear nerve fibers project in a tonotopic pattern to the cochlear nuclei. Those encoding the lowest frequencies (red)

terminals that envelop the bushy cell bodies, meeting their need for large synaptic currents. The need for

large synaptic currents in octopus cells is met by sum- include the ventral and dorsal nuclei. Each afferent fiber enters at the nerve root and splits into branches that run anteriorly (the ascending branch) and posteriorly (the descending branch). The ventral cochlear nucleus is thus divided functionally into anteroventral and posteroventral divisions. AMPA-type (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-

4-propionate) glutamate receptors at many synaptic

release sites. In contrast, stellate cells, in which even

ming inputs from large numbers of small terminals. The biophysical properties of neurons determine how synaptic currents are converted to voltage changes and over how long a time synaptic inputs are inte-

grated. Octopus and bushy cells in the ventral cochlear nucleus are able to respond with exceptionally rapid and precisely timed synaptic potentials. These neurons have a prominent, low-voltage-activated K + ductance that confers a low input resistance and rapid responsiveness and prevents repetitive firing (Figure 28–4C). The large synaptic currents that are required to trigger action potentials in these leaky cells are delivered through rapidly gated, high-conductance,

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 656

conrelatively small depolarizing currents produce large protracted voltage changes, generate slower excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in response to synaptic currents, and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors enhance those responses. The Dorsal Cochlear Nucleus Integrates Acoustic With Somatosensory Information in Making Use of

Spectral Cues for Localizing Sounds

## Among vertebrates, only mammals have dorsal cochlear nuclei. The dorsal cochlear nucleus receives input from two systems of neurons that project to different

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Part IV / Perception

A

High

frequencies Low frequencies Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System layers (Figure 28–4A,B). Its principal cells, fusiform

<!-- image -->


sound sources. Separate circuits detect interaural time

cells, integrate those two systems of inputs and con-

vey the result directly to the contralateral inferior

colliculus. The outermost molecular layer is the terminus of a system of parallel fibers, the unmyelinated axons of granule cells that are scattered in and around the

cochlear nuclei. This system transmits somatosensory, vestibular, and auditory information from widespread regions of the brain to the molecular layer. The deep layer receives acoustic information. Not only cochlear nerve fibers but also stellate cells of the ventral cochlear nucleus terminate in the deep

layer. Acoustic inputs are tonotopically organized in isofrequency laminae that run at right angles to parallel fibers. Fusiform cells, the principal cells of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, integrate the two systems of inputs. Parallel fibers in the molecular layer excite

fusiform cells through spines on apical dendrites in the molecular layer. Parallel fibers also terminate on spines of dendrites of cartwheel cells, interneurons that bear a strong resemblance to cerebellar Purkinje cells, which in turn inhibit fusiform cells. Cochlear nerve fibers and stellate cells in the ventral cochlear nucleus excite fusiform cells and inhibitory interneurons via synapses on the smooth basal dendrites in the deep layer. Recent experiments suggest that the circuits of the dorsal cochlear nucleus distinguish between unpredictable and predictable sounds. An animal's own

chewing or licking sounds, for example, are predictable and canceled through these circuits. The changes in spectral cues that arise when animals move their heads or ears or shoulders, changing the angle of incidence of sounds to the ears, are unpredictable, especially when an external sound source is moving. Somatosensory and vestibular information about the position of the head and ears, as well as descending information from higher levels of the nervous system about the animal's own movements, pass through the molecular layer to modulate acoustic information that arrives in the deep layer.

The Superior Olivary Complex in Mammals

Contains Separate Circuits for Detecting

Interaural Time and Intensity Differences

## In many vertebrates, including mammals and birds, neurons in the superior olivary complex compare the

activity of cells in the bilateral cochlear nuclei to locate

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 657

and intensity differences and project to the inferior

colliculi.

The Medial Superior Olive Generates a Map of Interaural Time Differences

## Differences in arrival times at the ears are not represented at the cochlea. Instead, they are first represented in the

medial superior olive where a map of interaural phase

is created by a comparison of the timing of action potentials in the responses to sounds from the two ears. Sounds arrive at the near ear before they arrive at the far ear, with interaural time differences being directly related to the location of sound sources in the horizontal plane (Figure 28–5A). Cochlear nerve fibers tuned to frequencies below 4 kHz and their bushy cell targets encode sounds by firing in phase with the pressure waves. This property

is known as phase-locking. Although individual neurons may fail to fire at some cycles, some set of neurons fires with every cycle. In so doing, these neurons carry information about the timing of inputs with every cycle of the sound. Sounds arriving from one side evoke phase-locked firing that is consistently earlier at the near ear than at the far ear, resulting in consistent interaural phase differences (Figure 28–5A). In 1948, Lloyd Jeffress suggested that an array of detectors of coincident inputs from the two ears, transmitted through delay lines comprised of axons with

systematically differing lengths, could form a map of interaural time differences and thus a map of the location of sound sources (Figure 28–5B). In such a circuit, conduction delays compensate for the earlier arrival at the near ear. Interaural time delays increase systematically as sounds move from the midline to the side, resulting in coincident firing further toward the edge of the neuronal array. Such neuronal maps have been found in the barn owl in the homolog of the medial superior olivary nucleus. Mammals and chickens use a variant

of this input arrangement. The principal neurons of the medial superior olive form a sheet of one or a few cells' thickness on each side of the midline. Each neu -ron has two tufts of dendrites, one extending to the lateral face of the sheet, and the other projecting to the medial face of the sheet (Figure 28–5C). The dendrites at the lateral face are contacted by the axons of large spherical bushy cells from the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus, whereas the dendrites at the medial face are contacted by large spherical bushy cells of matching best frequency from the contralateral cochlear nucleus. The axons of bushy cells terminate in the contralateral

09/12/20 5:02 PM


A

Part IV / Perception

Posteroventral

cochlear nucleus Anteroventral cochlear nucleus

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 658

A

B

5 mV

15 20

09/12/20 5:02 PM
A

Part IV / Perception

Posteroventral

cochlear nucleus Anteroventral cochlear nucleus

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 658

A

B

5 mV

15 20

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

medial superior olive with delay lines just as Jeffress


at the beginning and end of the sound but with every

had suggested, but the branches that terminate in the

ipsilateral medial superior olive are of equal length

(see Figure 28–5C). The conduction delays are such that each medial superior olive receives coincident excitatory inputs from the two ears only when sounds come from the

contralateral half of space. As sound sources move from the midline to the most lateral point on the contralateral side of the head, the earlier arrival of sounds at the contralateral ear needs to be compensated by successively longer delay lines. This results in inputs from the two ears coinciding at successively more posterior and lateral regions of the medial superior olive. Inhibition superimposed on these excitatory inputs plays a significant role in sharpening the map of interaural phase. In encoding interaural phase, individual neurons in the medial superior olive provide ambiguous information about interaural time differences. Phase

ambiguities are resolved when sounds have energy at multiple frequencies, as natural sounds almost always do. The sheet of neurons of the medial superior olive forms a representation of interaural phase along the rostrocaudal and lateromedial dimensions. The array of bushy cell inputs also imposes a tonotopic organization in the dorsoventral dimension. Sounds that contain energy at multiple frequencies evoke maximal coincident firing in a single dorsoventral column of neurons that localizes sound sources unambiguously. The beauty of using interaural phase to encode interaural time disparities is that the brain receives information about interaural time differences not just

Figure 28–4 (Opposite) Different types of cells in the coch-

lear nuclei extract distinct types of acoustic information

from cochlear nerve fibers.

A. The differing sizes and shapes of terminals along the length of each cochlear nerve fiber in the ventral cochlear nucleus of a newborn dog reflect differences in their postsynaptic targets.

The large end bulbs form synapses on bushy cells; smaller boutons contact stellate and octopus cells. The nerve fibers shown here are color-coded as in Figure 28–3: the yellow fiber encodes the highest frequencies and the red fiber the lowest. (Adapted, with permission, from Cajal 1909.) B. A layer of mouse granule cells (light brown) separates the unlayered ventral cochlear nucleus (pink) from the layered dorsal nucleus (tan and light brown). In the dorsal cochlear

- nucleus, the cell bodies of fusiform and granule cells are intermingled in a region between the outermost molecular layer and the deep layer. Cochlear nerve fibers, color-coded for frequency as in Figure 28–3, terminate in both nuclei but with different patterns of convergence on the principal cells. Each bushy,

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 659

cycle of an ongoing sound.

Principal cells of the medial superior olive also

receive sharply timed inhibition driven by sounds from both the ipsilateral and contralateral sides

-

through the lateral and medial nuclei of the trapezoid body, respectively. Remarkably, the inhibition through pathways from both sides precedes the arrival of excitation and sharpens the summation of excitation even though inhibition is mediated through a pathway that has an additional synapse. The great conduction speed through the disynaptic pathway through the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body is made possible by the large axons of globular bushy cells and the large calyceal terminals of Held that activate neurons in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body with short and consistently timed delays. The pathway that brings ipsilateral inhibition through the lateral nucleus of the trapezoid body is less well understood. Each medial superior olive thus forms a map of the location of sound sources in the contralateral hemi field. The striking difference between this spatial repre-

sentation of stimuli and those in other sensory systems is that it is not the result of the spatial arrangement of inputs, like retinotopic or somatosensory maps, but is inferred by the brain from computations made in the afferent pathways. The Lateral Superior Olive Detects Interaural Intensity Differences

## Sounds with wavelengths that are similar to or smaller than the head are deflected by the head, causing the

stellate, and fusiform cell receives input from a few auditory

nerve fibers and is sharply tuned, whereas individual octopus

cells are contacted by many auditory nerve fibers and are

broadly tuned. C. Differences in the intrinsic electrical properties of the principal cells of mouse cochlear nuclei are reflected in the patterns of voltage change in the cells. When steadily depo-

larized, stellate and fusiform cells fire repetitive action potentials, whereas repetitive firing in bushy and octopus cells is prevented by low-voltage-activated conductances. The low input resistance of bushy and octopus cells in the depolarized voltage range makes depolarizing voltage changes rapid but also small; the rise and fall of voltage changes in stellate and fusiform cells is slower. Synaptic potentials, too, are different. The brief synaptic potentials in bushy and octopus cells require larger synaptic currents but encode the timing of auditory nerve inputs more faithfully than do the longer-lasting synaptic potentials in stellate or fusiform cells. (Reproduced, with permission, from N. Golding.)

09/12/20 5:02 PM


Part IV / Perception

A Phase-locked ring in bushy cells

Right ear

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 660

Cochlear

nerve

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

intensity at the near ear to be greater than that at the


relatively weak inhibition, whereas those that arise

far ear. In humans, interaural intensities can differ

in sounds that have frequencies greater than about

2 kHz. Interaural intensity differences produced by such head shadowing are detected by a neuronal circuit that includes the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body and the lateral superior olive. Although the lateral superior olive does not form a map of the location of sounds in the horizontal plane, it performs the first of several integrative steps that

use interaural intensity differences to localize sounds. Neurons in this nucleus balance ipsilateral excitation with contralateral inhibition. Excitation comes from small spherical bushy cells and stellate cells in the ipsilateral ventral cochlear nucleus. Inhibition comes from a disynaptic pathway that includes globular bushy cells in the contralateral ventral cochlear nucleus and principal neurons of the ipsilateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (Figure 28–6A). Sounds that arise ipsilaterally generate relatively strong excitation and

Figure 28–5 (Opposite) Interaural differences in the arrival

of a sound help localize sound in the horizontal plane.

A. When a sound such as a pure tone arises from the right, the

## right ear detects the sound earlier than the left ear. The difference in the time of arrival at the two ears is the interaural time

delay (ITD). Cochlear nerve fibers and their bushy cell targets fire in phase with pressure changes. Although individual bushy cells may fail to fire at some cycles, a set of cells will encode the timing of a low-frequency sound and its frequency with every cycle. Comparison of the onset of action potentials in the bushy cells at the two sides reveals the ITDs (slanted black lines). B. Interaural time differences can be measured by an array of neurons whose inputs from the two ears are delay lines as proposed by Lloyd Jeffress (1948). Action potentials propagate

to reach the nearest terminals before they reach the farthest ones; thus, in the delay line from the right, terminals will generate synaptic potentials sequentially from right to left, and in the delay line from the left, terminals will generate synaptic potentials sequentially from left to right. Suppose that such postsynaptic neurons are coincidence detectors, firing only when they receive excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) simultaneously from the right and left. Sounds that arise at the midline reach the right and left ears simultaneously with no interaural time disparity (ITD = 0). The neuron in the middle of the array that receives input from equally long axons from the two sides will thus receive simultaneous EPSPs from the two sides. When sounds come from the right, signals from the right ear arrive at the central nervous system earlier than those from the left ear (ITD &gt;0). Sound from the right generates synchronous EPSPs in the (yellow) neuron because the earlier arrival of sound from the right (red) is compensated by a longer conduction delay relative to that from the left (blue). Likewise, when sound arises from the left, the ITD &lt;0 and conduction delays

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 661

contralaterally generate stronger inhibition than exci-

tation. Neurons in the lateral superior olive are acti-

vated more strongly by sounds from the ipsilateral than from the contralateral hemifield. The firing of lateral superior olivary neurons is a function of the location of the sound source and thus carries informa -tion about where sounds arise in the horizontal plane (Figure 28–6B). In order to balance excitation and inhibition stim -ulated by one sound, the ipsilateral excitation and contralateral inhibition must arrive at neurons in the

lateral superior olive at the same time. Thus, excitation that arises monosynaptically from the ipsilateral ventral cochlear nucleus must arrive at the same time as inhibition that arises disynaptically from the contralateral ventral cochlear nucleus. The inhibition comes from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body whose inputs through large axons of globular bushy cells and large calyces of Held produce synaptic responses

from the left (blue) compensate for the early arrival at the left.

Such a neuronal circuit produces a map of interaural time dis-

parities in the coincidence detectors; as sounds move from the

right to left, they activate coincidence detectors sequentially from left to right. Such an arrangement of delay lines has been found in the nucleus laminaris of the barn owl, the homolog of the mammalian medial superior olivary nucleus. C. Mammals use delay lines only in the nucleus contralateral to a sound source to form a map of interaural time differences. The bitufted neurons of the medial superior olivary nucleus

form a sheet that is contacted on its lateral face by bushy cells from the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus and on the medial face by bushy cells from the contralateral cochlear nucleus. (Although it is depicted here schematically in a coronal section of the brain stem, the encoding of interaural disparities is in a sheet of neurons that also has a rostrocaudal dimension.) On the ipsilateral side, the branches of the bushy cell axon are of equal length and thus initiate synaptic currents in their targets in the medial superior olive simultaneously. On the contralateral side, the branches deliver synaptic currents sequentially first to the regions closest to the midline, and then to progressively more lateral regions. Neurons of the medial superior olive detect synchronous excitation from the two ears only when sounds arise from the contralateral half of space. When sounds arise from the right side, their early arrival at the right ear is compensated by progressively longer conduction delays to activate neurons more and more toward the lateral end of the left medial superior olive (the yellow cell is activated by a sound from the far right, as in part B). When sounds arise from the front and there is no interaural time difference, neurons in the anterior end of the medial superior olive are activated synchronously from both sides. Each medial superior olive forms a map of where sounds arise in the contralateral hemifield. (Adapted, with permission, from Yin 2002.)

09/12/20 5:02 PM


Part IV / Perception

Figure 28–6 Interaural differences in the intensity of

a sound also help localize sound in the horizontal

plane.

A. Principal cells of the lateral superior olivary nucleus (LSO) receive excitatory input from the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus (CN) and inhibitory input from the contralat-

eral cochlear nucleus. A coronal section through the brain stem of a cat illustrates the anatomical connec -tions. Small spherical bushy cells and stellate cells in the ipsilateral ventral cochlear nucleus provide direct excitation. Globular bushy cells in the contralateral ventral cochlear nucleus project across the midline and excite neurons in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) via large terminals, the calyces of Held. Cells of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body inhibit neurons in the lateral superior olive as well as in the medial superior olive (MSO). For neurons of the lateral superior olive to compare intensities of the same sound, the timing of the ipsilateral excitatory input must be matched with the timing of the contralateral inhibitory input. To this end, globular bushy cells have particularly large axons that terminate in a calyx of Held in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body where synaptic transmission is strong and thus the synaptic delay is short and invariant in its timing. B. The firing of neurons in the lateral superior olive reflects a balance of ipsilateral excitation and contralateral inhibition. When sounds arise from the ipsilateral

side, excitation is relatively stronger and inhibition is relatively weaker than when sounds arise from the contralateral side. The transition between the dominance of excitation and inhibition reflects the location of the sound source.

A

<!-- image -->

with short and consistently timed delays. The axons of Olivocochlear neurons form a feedback loop from the

small spherical bushy cells and stellate cells that carry

ipsilateral excitation conduct more slowly than those

of globular bushy cells. The terminals of the globular bushy cells, the calyces of Held, engulf the cell bodies of trapezoidbody neurons so dramatically that they caught the

attention of early anatomists and modern biophysicists. A single somatic terminal releases neurotransmitter at numerous release sites and generates large synaptic currents. The reliability of pre- and postsynaptic recordings at this synapse makes the site ideal for detailed studies of the mechanisms of synaptic transmission (Chapter 15). The Superior Olivary Complex Provides Feedback to the Cochlea

## Although sensory systems are largely afferent, bringing sensory information to the brain, recent studies

have led to an appreciation of the importance of effer-

ent signaling at many levels of the auditory system.

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 662

superior olivary complex to hair cells in the cochlea.

Their cell bodies lie around the major dense clusters

of cell bodies in the olivary nuclei. In mammals, two groups of olivocochlear neurons have been functionally distinguished. The medial olivocochlear neurons' axons terminate on the outer hair cells bilaterally; the lateral olivocochlear neuron axons terminate ipsilaterally on the afferent fibers associated with inner hair cells. Most medial olivocochlear neurons, with cell bodies that lie ventral and medial within the olivary complex, send their axons to the contralateral coch-

lea (Figure 28–7), but many also project to the ipsilateral cochlea. These cholinergic neurons act on hair cells through a special class of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-channels formed from α9 and α10 subunits. The influx of Ca 2+ through these channels leads to the opening of K + channels that hyperpolarize outer hair cells. These neurons thus mediate tuned negative feedback and are binaural, being driven predominantly but not exclusively by stellate cells of the contralateral

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Input from

contralateral

ear Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System To inferior colliculus erally symmetrical; the major connections among the nuclei ventral cochlear nucleus. Activity in these efferent fib- ers reduces the sensitivity of the cochlea and protects it from damage by loud sounds. Collateral branches of medial olivocochlear neurons terminate on stellate cells in the cochlear nucleus, acting on conventional nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, forming an excitatory feedback loop. Lateral olivocochlear neurons, with cell bodies that lie in and around the lateral superior olive, send their axons exclusively to the ipsilateral cochlea, where they terminate on the afferent fibers from inner hair cells. Charles Liberman and his colleagues demonstrated Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 663

<!-- image -->

that form the early auditory pathway are shown. The ascending pathway begins in the cochlea and progresses through several parallel pathways through the cochlear nuclei: the cochlear nuclei, the superior olivary nuclei, and the ventral and dorsal nuclei of the lateral lemniscus. These signals converge in the inferior colliculus, which projects to the medial geniculate

Superior

olivary

complex

Dorsal

cochlear

nucleus

Ventral

cochlear

nucleus

Fusiform cells

Stellate cells

Bushy cells

Octopus cells

body of the thalamus and thence to the cerebral cortex (see

Figure 28–2). Some of the connections are through excitatory

pathways (colored lines) and others through inhibitory path-

ways (black lines). These same nuclei are also interconnected through descending pathways (blue lines) and bilaterally through commissural projections. (LSO, lateral superior olivary nucleus; MNTB, medial nucleus of the trapezoid body; MSO , medial superior olive; VNTB, ventral nucleus of the trapezoid body).

that these efferents balance the excitability of cochlear

nerve fibers at the two ears.

Ventral and Dorsal Nuclei of the Lateral Lemniscus Shape Responses in the Inferior Colliculus With

Inhibition

## Fibers from the cochlear and superior olivary nuclei run in a band, or lemniscus, along the lateral edge of

the brain as they ascend from the brainstem to the infe-

rior colliculus. Along this band of fibers are groups of neurons that form the dorsal and ventral nuclei of the

09/12/20 5:02 PM



Part IV / Perception

lateral lemniscus. Neurons in the ventral nuclei of the

lateral lemniscus receive input from all major groups

of principal cells of the ventral cochlear nuclei and

respond predominantly to monaural input, driven by the contralateral ear, while neurons in the dorsal nucleus receive input from the lateral and medial superior olivary nuclei and respond to inputs from both ears. Neurons in both subdivisions are inhibitory and project to the inferior colliculus. Their roles are intriguing but not fully understood. Since understanding the meaning of sounds is not greatly compromised by the loss of one ear, it would make sense that the largely monaural functions of the

ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus involve the processing of the meaning of sounds. Furthermore, mammals vary in the information they extract from their acoustic environments, which may account for differences between species in the structure and function of the ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus. A border that is more distinct in some mamma lian species than in others separates the ventral and intermediate nuclei and the subdivisions of the ventral experiments have shown that mammals suppress all but the first-arriving sound, a phenomenon termed the precedence effect. It has been proposed that persis- tent inhibition in the inferior colliculus from the dor -sal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus serves to suppress spurious localization cues such as echoes and thus that it contributes to the precedence effect. Afferent Auditory Pathways Converge in the Inferior Colliculus

## The inferior colliculus occupies a central position in the auditory pathway of all vertebrate animals because

all auditory pathways ascending through the brain

-stem converge there (Figure 28–7). The most important sources of excitation are stellate cells from the contralat -eral ventral cochlear nucleus, fusiform cells from the contralateral dorsal cochlear nucleus, principal cells of the ipsilateral medial superior olive and of the contralateral lateral superior olive, principal cells of ipsilateral and contralateral dorsal nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, commissural connections from the contralateral inferior colliculus, and pyramidal cells in layer V of the auditory cortex. Important sources of inhibition include the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, the ipsilateral lateral superior olive, the superior paraolivary nucleus, and the contralateral inferior colliculus. The inferior colliculus of mammals is subdivided into the central nucleus, dorsal cortex, and external cortex. The central nucleus is tonotopically organized.

nucleus of the lateral lemniscus. Neurons differ in their shapes, biophysical properties, and pattern of convergence of cochlear nuclear inputs. One group of glycinergic neurons is innervated by large calyceal terminals from octopus cells. These could generate inhibitory temporal reference signals in the inferior colliculus. Some broadly tuned neurons fire almost exclusively at the onset of tones with sharply timed action potentials but convey periodicity in complex sounds, raising the question of whether these neurons might have a role in encoding pitch in music and speech. Others respond by firing as long as a tone is present; these neurons track the fluctuations in intensity or the envelopes of sounds, a feature that is useful for understanding the meaning of sounds including speech. Tuning curves of the neurons are variable, with many being broad or W-shaped. Neurons in the dorsal nucleus are predominantly binaural, receiving input from the ipsilateral medial superior olive and from the lateral superior olive,

primarily from the contralateral side. These neurons are GABAergic, targeting the inferior colliculi on both sides and also targeting the contralateral dorsal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus. Excitation in neurons of the dorsal nucleus is amplified by NMDA-type glutamate receptors so that the inhibition they generate in their targets outlasts sound stimuli for tens of milliseconds and thus has been termed persistent inhibition. To localize sounds accurately, animals must ignore the reflections of sounds from surrounding surfaces that arrive after the initial direct wave front. Psychophysical

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 664

Low frequencies are represented dorsolaterally and high frequencies ventromedially in laminae that have similar best frequencies. Fine mapping has shown that the tonotopic organization is discontinuous; the separation between best frequencies corresponds to psychophysically measured critical bands of approximately one-third octave. Although the central nucleus is organized tonotopically, the spectral range of inputs to these neurons is broader than at earlier stages in the auditory pathway. Inhibition can be broad and narrows the responses of excitatory neurons. Furthermore, tuning can be modulated by descending inputs from the cortex. Many neurons in the central nucleus carry information about the location of sound sources. The majority of these cells are sensitive to interaural time

and intensity differences, essential cues for localizing sounds in the horizontal plane. Neurons are also sensitive to spectral cues that localize sounds in the vertical plane. Physiological correlates of the precedence effect have been measured in the inferior colliculus, where inhibition suppresses simulated reflections of sounds.

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

The inferior colliculus is not only a convergence The Inferior Colliculus Transmits Auditory

point but also a branch point for ascending or outflow

pathways. Neurons of the central nucleus project to the

## -Auditory information ascends from the inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate body of the thalamus and

from there to the auditory cortex. The pathways from

external cortex of the inferior colliculus and also to the thalamus and the nucleus of the brachium of the infe rior colliculus, both of which then project to the superior colliculus (or the optic tectum in birds). Sound Location Information From the Inferior

Colliculus Creates a Spatial Map of Sound in the

Superior Colliculus

## The inferior colliculus is not only a convergence point but also a branch point for ascending or outflow pathways. Central nucleus neurons project to the thalamus

the inferior colliculus include a lemniscal or core pathway and extralemniscal or belt pathways. Descending projections from the auditory cortex to the medial geniculate body are prominent both anatomically and functionally. Stimulus Selectivity Progressively Increases Along

the Ascending Pathway

## -A marked feature of auditory neurons at structures along the ascending pathway is their progressively increased stimulus selectivity. An auditory nerve fiber

and also to the external cortex of the inferior colliculus and the nucleus of the brachium of the inferior collicu lus, both of which then project to the superior colliculus (or the optic tectum in birds). The superior colliculus is critical for reflexive orienting movements of the head and eyes to acoustic and visual cues in space. By the time the binaural

sound cues and the monaural spectral cues that underlie mammalian sound localization reach the superior colliculus, they have been merged to create a spatial map of sound in which neurons are unambiguously tuned to specific sound directions. This convergence is critical since binaural differences in level and timing alone cannot unambiguously code for a single position in space. The spectral cues that provide information about vertical location must be taken into account, as different locations in the vertical plane can give rise to identical interaural differences in time or intensity. Such unambiguous spatial mapping occurs both in birds and in some mammals (Figure 28–8). In ferrets and guinea pigs, it occurs in the external cortex and the nucleus of the brachium of the inferior colliculus. Within the superior colliculus, the auditory map is aligned with maps of visual space and the body surface. Unlike the visual and somatosensory spatial is primarily selective to one stimulus dimension, the frequency of a pure tone. The stimulus selectivity of neurons in the central auditory system may be multidimensional, such as frequency, spectral bandwidth, sound intensity, modulation frequency, and spatial location. In this multidimensional acoustic space, neurons become more selective at successive auditory areas along the ascending pathway. Many neurons in the auditory cortex (especially those in upper cortical layers) are highly selective to acoustic stimuli, such that the preferred (nearly opti-

maps, the auditory spatial map does not reflect the peripheral receptor surface; instead, it is computed from a combination of cues that identify the specific position of a sound source in space. Auditory, visual, and somatosensory neurons in the superior colliculus all converge on output pathways in the same structure that controls orienting move-

ments of the eyes, head, and external ears. The motor circuits of the superior colliculus are mapped with respect to motor targets in space and are aligned with the sensory maps. Such sensory-motor correspondence facilitates the sensory guiding of movements.

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 665

mal) stimulus of a neuron occupies only a small region of its receptive field in the multidimensional acoustic space. The region of the preferred stimulus becomes increasingly smaller at structures along the path to the auditory cortex (Figure 28–9A). Pure tones and broadband noises are two extreme cases of a wide range of acoustic stimuli that could preferentially drive auditory cortex neurons. The majority of neurons in the auditory cortex are preferentially driven by stimuli with greater spectral and temporal complexity than pure tones and broadband noises. The increased stimulus selectivity is also accompanied by changes in a neuron's firing pattern. When neurons are driven by their preferred stimuli, they

respond not only with higher firing rates but also with sustained firing throughout the stimulus duration (Figure 28–9B). The receptive field of a cortical neuron contains a "sustained firing region" (corresponding to preferred stimuli) within a larger "onset firing region" (corresponding to nonpreferred stimuli). This explains why it is common for experimenters to observe onset (phasic) responses in auditory cortex when a continuous sound is played.

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Information to the Cerebral Cortex



Part IV / Perception

A Directional tuning of neurons in the ferret

B

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 28–8 A spatial map of sound is formed in the supe-

rior colliculus.

R200L20

<!-- image -->

A. Neurons in the ferret's superior colliculus are directionally

tuned to sound in the horizontal plane. The illustration shows the firing rate profiles of collicular neurons 1 through 5 as a function

of where the sounds are located, plotted in polar coordinates centered on the head. The drawing on the right shows the location of the recorded neurons in the colliculus. Note that neuron 1 responds best to sounds in front of the animal, whereas neurons that are located progressively more caudally in the colliculus gradually shift their responses to sounds that originate farther contralaterally. (Adapted, with permission, from King 1999.) B. The normalized responses of a neuron in the superior colliculus of a barn owl to noise bursts presented at various

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 666


<!-- image -->

Neurons in

the superior

colliculus

Response (% of max)




+40

+20


–20

–40

–60

–80

locations along the horizon are plotted below (bottom right). The

yellow areas in these tuning curves indicate where responses

exceed 50% of the maximum. The sensitivity of the neuron to

a particular location along the horizon or a particular elevation (top right) creates a discrete best auditory area in space for this neuron (top middle), shown as the colored ellipse on a plot of spatial locations with respect to a point straight in front of the owl. The neuron also responds to visual cues from the same area (the box labeled V). The photo illustrates the neuron's best area in space with respect to the position of the head (the intersection of the vertical and horizontal dotted lines indicates where the owl's head is pointing). The recording site for this neuron is also shown. (Adapted, with permission, from Cohen and Knudsen 1999. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier Science.)

Spea

ke

r el

ev

ation (deg)

09/12/20 5:02 PM

A

Nonpreferred

stimuli Preferred stimuli

(onset ring)

(sustained ring)

<!-- image -->

Ascending

auditory

pathway

Figure 28–9 Stimulus selectivity increases along the

ascending auditory pathway.

A. Stimulus selectivity and the relationship between sustained Preferred Nonpreferred

and onset firings along the ascending auditory pathway. Each open ellipse represents the multidimensional receptive field

<!-- image -->

(RF) of a neuron illustrated on a two-dimensional plane. The filled ellipse represents the "sustained firing region" (corresponding to preferred stimuli) of a neuron's RF. The rest of the area within the RF is the "onset firing region" (corresponding to nonpreferred stimuli). A neuron exhibits sustained or onset firing depending on which region of the RF is stimulated. The neuron does not fire if stimuli fall outside the RF. (Adapted, with permission, from Wang 2018.) B. Population-averaged firing rate in response to each neuron's preferred and nonpreferred stimuli from primary auditory cortex

The discovery of how sustained firing is evoked

in the auditory cortex is important because it provides

a direct link between neural firing and the perception

of a continuous acoustic event. Such sustained firing by auditory cortex neurons has been observed only in awake animals. In contrast, an auditory nerve fiber

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 667

450 500

(A1). Extracellular recordings were made in awake marmoset

monkeys. Thick bar = stimulus duration. (Adapted, with

permission, from Wang et al. 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer

- Nature.) C. Distribution of activity among A1 neurons in response to a sound burst. On the y-axis, all A1 neurons are ranked according to their preference for a particular stimulus. The

blue-to-red color gradient represents increasing firing rate. The neuron with the highest firing rate is located at the top end of the y-axis. Black bar = stimulus duration. Most neurons show a brief phasic response to the onset of the sound, but only those particularly tuned to the sound maintain their response until the end of the sound. (Adapted, with permission, from Middlebrooks 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)

typically shows sustains firing in response to a wide

range of acoustic signals as long as the spectral energy

of the stimulus falls within the neuron's receptive

field, under either anesthetized or awake conditions. When David Hubel and his colleagues ventured into the auditory cortex more than half a century ago, they

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

B
A

Nonpreferred

stimuli Preferred stimuli

(onset ring)

(sustained ring)

<!-- image -->

Ascending

auditory

pathway

Figure 28–9 Stimulus selectivity increases along the

ascending auditory pathway.

A. Stimulus selectivity and the relationship between sustained Preferred Nonpreferred

and onset firings along the ascending auditory pathway. Each open ellipse represents the multidimensional receptive field

<!-- image -->

(RF) of a neuron illustrated on a two-dimensional plane. The filled ellipse represents the "sustained firing region" (corresponding to preferred stimuli) of a neuron's RF. The rest of the area within the RF is the "onset firing region" (corresponding to nonpreferred stimuli). A neuron exhibits sustained or onset firing depending on which region of the RF is stimulated. The neuron does not fire if stimuli fall outside the RF. (Adapted, with permission, from Wang 2018.) B. Population-averaged firing rate in response to each neuron's preferred and nonpreferred stimuli from primary auditory cortex

The discovery of how sustained firing is evoked

in the auditory cortex is important because it provides

a direct link between neural firing and the perception

of a continuous acoustic event. Such sustained firing by auditory cortex neurons has been observed only in awake animals. In contrast, an auditory nerve fiber

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 667

450 500

(A1). Extracellular recordings were made in awake marmoset

monkeys. Thick bar = stimulus duration. (Adapted, with

permission, from Wang et al. 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer

- Nature.) C. Distribution of activity among A1 neurons in response to a sound burst. On the y-axis, all A1 neurons are ranked according to their preference for a particular stimulus. The

blue-to-red color gradient represents increasing firing rate. The neuron with the highest firing rate is located at the top end of the y-axis. Black bar = stimulus duration. Most neurons show a brief phasic response to the onset of the sound, but only those particularly tuned to the sound maintain their response until the end of the sound. (Adapted, with permission, from Middlebrooks 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)

typically shows sustains firing in response to a wide

range of acoustic signals as long as the spectral energy

of the stimulus falls within the neuron's receptive

field, under either anesthetized or awake conditions. When David Hubel and his colleagues ventured into the auditory cortex more than half a century ago, they

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

B




Part IV / Perception

were puzzled by how difficult it was to drive neurons

in the auditory cortex of awake cats. Now we know it

was because they were probably recording from highly

selective neurons and using nonpreferred stimuli. The availability of digital technology since then has made it possible to create and test a large battery of acoustic stimuli in search of the preferred stimulus of a highly selective neuron in auditory cortex. The overall picture elucidated by experimenters is that when a sound is heard, the auditory cortex first responds with transient discharges (encoding the onset of a sound) across a relatively large population of neurons. As the time passes, the activation becomes restricted to a smaller population of neurons that are preferentially driven by the sound (Figure 28–9C), which results in a selective representation of the sound within the neuronal population and over time. Because each neuron has its own preferred stimulus that differs from preferred stimuli of other neurons, neurons in the auditory cortex collectively cover the entire acoustic space with their sustained firing regions. Therefore, any particular sound can evoke sustained firing throughout its duration in a particular population of neurons in the auditory cortex. In other words, the region of auditory cortex activated by acoustic stimulation in whole-brain imaging (eg, functional magnetic resonance imaging [fMRI], positron emission tomography [PET]) comprises neurons that are preferentially driven by the acoustic stimulus. The Auditory Cortex Maps Numerous Aspects of Sound Characteristic frequency primary auditory cortex shows its tonotopic organization.

<!-- image -->

The primary areas are surrounded by higher-order areas (see Figure 28–11).

## The auditory cortex includes multiple distinct functional areas on the dorsal surface of the temporal lobe.

The most prominent projection is from the ventral divi-

sion of the medial geniculate nucleus to the primary auditory cortex (A1, or Brodmann's area 41). As in the subcortical structures, the neurons in this cytoarchitectonically distinct region are arranged tonotopically. In monkeys, neurons tuned to low frequencies are found at the rostral end of A1, while those responsive to high frequencies are in the caudal region (Figure 28–10). Thus, like the visual and somatosensory cortices, A1 contains a map reflecting the sensory periphery. Because the cochlea encodes discrete frequencies at different points along the basilar membrane, however, a one-dimensional frequency map from the

periphery is spread across the two-dimensional surface of the cortex, with a smooth frequency gradient in one direction and isofrequency contours along the other direction. In many species, subregions of the auditory cortex that represent biologically significant frequencies are larger than others because of extensive

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 668

inputs, similar to the large area in the primary visual

cortex devoted to inputs from the fovea.

In addition to frequency, other features of auditory

stimuli are mapped in the primary auditory cortex, although the overall organization is less clear and pre-

cise than for vision. Auditory neurons in A1 are excited either by input from both ears (EE neurons), with the contralateral input usually stronger than the ipsilateral contribution, or by a unilateral input (EI). The EI neurons are inhibited by stimulation of the opposite ear. Certain neurons in A1 also seem to be organized according to bandwidth, that is, according to their responsiveness to a narrow or broad range of

frequencies. Neurons near the center of the isofrequency contours are tuned more narrowly to bandwidth or frequency than those located away from the center. Distinct subregions of A1 form clusters of cells with narrow or broadband tuning within individual isofrequency contours. Within intracortical circuits, neurons receive input primarily from neurons with similar bandwidths and characteristic frequencies.

09/12/20 5:02 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

This modular organization of bandwidth selectivity


mirror-image tonotopy: The direction of tonotopy

may allow redundant processing of incoming signals

through neuronal filters of varying bandwidths as well

as center frequencies, which could be useful for the analysis of spectrally complex sounds such as speciesspecific vocalizations, including speech. Several other parameters are represented in A1. These include neuronal response latency, loudness, modulation of loudness, and the rate and direction of

frequency modulation. Although it remains to be seen how these various maps intersect, this array of parameters clearly endows each neuron and each location in A1 with the ability to represent many independent variables of sound and thus allows for a great diversity of neuronal selectivity. As is true for visual and somatosensory areas of the cortex, sensory representation in A1 can change in response to alterations in input pathways. After

peripheral hearing loss, tonotopic mapping in A1 can be altered so that neurons that were previously responsive to sounds within the lost range of hearing will begin to respond to adjacent frequencies. The work of Michael Merzenich and others has shown that behav ioral training of adult animals can also result in largescale reorganization of the auditory cortex, so that the most behaviorally relevant frequencies—those specifically associated with attention or reinforcement— come to be overrepresented. The auditory areas of young animals are particularly plastic. In rodents, the frequency organization of A1 emerges gradually during development from reverses at the boundary between fields. In monkeys, as many as 7 to 10 secondary (belt) areas surround the three or four primary or primary-like (core) areas (see Figure 28–11). The secondary areas receive input from the core areas of the auditory cortex and, in some cases, from thalamic nuclei. Electrophysiological and imaging studies have confirmed that A1 in humans lies on Heschl's gyrus, in the temporal lobe, medial to the Sylvian fissure. In addition, recent fMRI studies have revealed that in humans, just as in monkeys, pure tones activate primarily core areas, whereas the neurons of belt areas prefer complex sounds such as narrowband noise bursts. A Second Sound-Localization Pathway From the Inferior Colliculus Involves the Cerebral Cortex in Gaze Control

## Many neurons in the auditory cortex have broad spatial tuning, but neurons with narrow spatial tuning are

also found when studied in awake animals. In mon

-

-keys, auditory cortex neurons are tuned to both frontal space and rear space (outside the coverage of vision), as well as the space above and below the horizontal plane. In contrast to the auditory midbrain, however, there is yet no evidence for a spatially organized map of sound in any of the cortical areas sensitive to sound location. The sound-localization pathways in the cortex originate in the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus and ascend through the auditory thalamus and

the primary and secondary cortical areas, eventually reaching the frontal eye fields involved in gaze control. Eye or head movements can be elicited by stimulating the frontal eye fields, which connect directly to brain stem tegmentum premotor nuclei that mediate gaze changes as well as to the superior colliculus. But why should there be this second sound-localization pathway connected to gaze control circuitry when the midbrain pathway from location-sensitive neurons in the inferior colliculus to the superior colliculus to gaze control circuitry directly controls orientation movements of the head, eyes, and ears? Behavioral experiments shed light on this question. Although lesions of A1 can result in profound sound-localization deficits, no deficiency is seen when

the task is simply to indicate the side of the sound source by pushing a lever. The deficit becomes apparent only when the animal must approach the location of a brief sound source; that is, when the task is the more complex one of forming an image of the source, remembering it, and moving toward it.

09/12/20 5:02 PM

an early, crude frequency map. Raising animals in acoustic environments in which they are exposed to repeated tone pulses of a particular frequency results in a persistent expansion of cortical areas devoted to that frequency, accompanied by a general deterioration and broadening of the tonotopic map. This result not only suggests that the development of A1 is experience-dependent but also raises the possibility that early exposure to abnormal sound environments can create long-term disruptions of high-level sensory processing. A greater understanding of how this happens and whether it is also true for human fetuses and infants may provide insights into the origin and remediation of disorders in which central auditory processing is impaired, such as many forms of dyslexia. Moreover, the ability to induce plasticity in the auditory cortex of adults by engaging attention or reward raises new hopes for brain repair even in adulthood. The primary auditory area of mammals is surrounded by multiple distinct regions, some of which are tonotopic. Adjacent tonotopic fields have

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 669


Part IV / Perception

Experiments in barn owls have produced particu-

larly compelling evidence. The ability of owls to ori-

ent to sounds in space is unaffected by inactivation of

the avian equivalent of the frontal eye fields. Similarly, when the midbrain sound localization pathway is disrupted by pharmacological inactivation of the superior colliculus, the probability of an accurate head turn is decreased, but animals still respond correctly more than half of the time. In contrast, when both structures are inactivated, animals are completely unable to orient accurately to acoustic stimuli on the contralateral side. Thus, cortical and subcortical sound-localization pathways have parallel access to gaze control centers, perhaps providing some redundancy. Moreover, when only the frontal eye fields are inactivated, birds lose their ability to orient their gaze toward a target that has been extinguished and must be remembered, just as is seen with mammalian A1 lesions. Thus, in both mammals and birds, cortical pathways are required for more complex sound-localization tasks. This appears to be a general difference between cortical and subcortical pathways. Subcortical circuits are important for rapid and reliable performance temporal lobe targets both project to largely different areas of the frontal lobes (Figure 28–11).

The frontal areas receiving anterior auditory

projections are generally implicated in nonspatial functions, whereas those that are targets of posterior

auditory areas are implicated in spatial processing. Electrophysiological and imaging studies provide support for this. Caudal and parietal areas are more active when a stimulus must be localized or moves, and ventral areas are more active during identification of the same stimulus or analysis of its pitch. Thus anterior-ventral pathways may identify auditory objects by analyzing spectral and temporal characteristics of sounds, whereas the more dorsal-posterior pathways may specialize in sound-source location, detection of sound-source motion, and spatial segregation of sources. Although the idea that all sensory areas of the cerebral cortex initially segregate object identification and location is attractive, it is likely an oversimplifica-

-tion. It is clear that the medial-belt areas of the audi -tory cortex project to both dorsal and ventral frontal cortices, and neurons with broad spatial responsiveness are distributed throughout caudal and anterior areas. Nonetheless, although the details may differ between systems, the basic concept holds that sensory systems deconstruct stimuli into features and analyze each type in discrete pathways. The Cerebral Cortex Modulates Sensory Processing

in Subcortical Auditory Areas

## An intriguing feature of all mammalian cortical areas, and one shared by the auditory system, is the massive projection from the cortex back to lower areas. There

are almost 10 times as many corticofugal fibers entering the sensory thalamus as there are axons projecting from the thalamus to the cortex. Projections from the auditory cortex also innervate the inferior colliculus, olivocochlear neurons, some basal ganglionic structures, and even the dorsal cochlear nucleus. Insights into possible functions of this feedback have come from the bat's auditory system. Silencing of frequency-specific cortical areas leads to decreased

responses in thalamus and inferior colliculus in the corresponding frequency-specific areas, whereas activation of cortical projections increases and sharpens the responses of some neurons. The auditory cortex can therefore actively adjust and improve auditory signal processing in subcortical structures. A variety of evidence suggests that cortical feedback also occurs in other mammals. This challenges the view of ascending

09/12/20 5:02 PM

of behaviors that are critical to survival. Cortical cir cuitry allows for working memory, complex recognition tasks, and selection of stimuli and evaluation of their significance, resulting in slower but more differentiated performance. Examples of this also exist in auditory pathways not involved in localization. Conditioned fear responses to simple auditory stimuli are mediated by direct rapid pathways from the auditory thalamus to the amygdala; they can still be elicited after cortical inactivation. However, fear responses that require more complex discrimination of auditory stimuli require pathways through the cortex and are accordingly slower but more specific. Auditory Circuits in the Cerebral Cortex Are Segregated Into Separate Processing Streams

## In the visual system, the output from the primary visual cortex is segregated into separate dorsal and ven-

tral streams concerned respectively with object location

in space and object identification. A similar division of labor is thought to exist in the somatosensory cortex, and recent evidence suggests that the auditory cortex also follows this plan. Anatomical tracing studies of the three most accessible belt areas in monkeys show that the more rostral and ventral areas connect primarily to the more rostral

and ventral areas of the temporal lobe, whereas the more caudal area projects to the dorsal and caudal temporal lobe. In addition, these belt areas and their

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 670

Figure 28–11 The "what" and "where"

streams in the auditory cortical system of

primates.  The ventral "what" stream and dorsal Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System PP

"where" stream originate in different parts of primary and belt cortex and ultimately project to distinct regions of prefrontal cortex through independent paths. (MGB, medial geniculate body of the thalamus; PB, parabelt cortex; PFC, prefrontal cortex; PP, posterior parietal cortex; T2/T3 , areas of temporal cortex.) (Adapted, with permission, from Rauschecker and Tian 2000. Copyright 2000 National Academy of Sciences; adapted from Romanski and Averbeck 2009.)

<!-- image -->

sensory pathways as purely feedforward circuits and

suggests that we should regard the thalamus and cor-

tex as reciprocally and highly interconnected circuits

in which the cortex exercises some top-down control of perception. The Cerebral Cortex Forms Complex

Sound Representations

## The Auditory Cortex Uses Temporal and Rate Codes to Represent Time-Varying Sounds

## An important function of the auditory system is to represent time-varying sounds across multiple time scales, from a few milliseconds to tens and hundreds

of milliseconds or even longer. In the auditory nerve, firing patterns largely mirror the temporal structure of sounds, firing in phase with sounds to the limit of the phase-locking. The precision of this temporally based neural representation gradually decreases as information ascends toward the auditory cortex due to synaptic integration at the soma and dendrites.

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 671

Where

What

MGB

Thalamus

The upper limit of the phase-locking to periodic

sounds progressively decreases along the ascend-

ing auditory pathway from approximately 3,000 Hz

in the auditory nerve to less than approximately 300 Hz in the medial geniculate body in the thalamus and less than 100 Hz in A1. The upper limit of the phase-locking in A1 is similar to that found in the primary visual and somatosensory areas of cortex. In the auditory cortex, the temporal firing pattern alone is inadequate to represent the entire range of time-varying sounds that are perceived by humans and animals. Cortical neurons use an alternative method to represent time-varying sounds that change more rapidly than the upper limit of the phase-locking in A1. When

an animal listens to a sequence of periodic clicks, two types of neural responses are observed in A1. One population of neurons displays phase-locked periodic firing in response to click trains with long intervals between clicks or slowly varying sounds, but not to click trains with short intervals between clicks or rapidly varying sounds (Figure 28–12A). The second population of neurons does not respond to click trains

09/12/20 5:02 PM



Part IV / Perception

at long interclick intervals, but instead fires increas-

ingly rapidly as the interclick interval becomes shorter

(Figure 28–12B). These two populations of A1 neu-

rons, referred to as synchronized and nonsynchronized , respectively, have complementary response properties. Neurons of the synchronized population explicitly represent slowly occurring sound events by synchronized neural firing (a temporal code), whereas neurons of the nonsynchronized population implicitly represent rapidly changing sound events by changes in average firing rates (a rate code). The nonsynchronized neurons have been observed in the auditory cortex of awake primates and rodents. In A1, neural representation changes from a temporal Synchronized responses

(responsive to long intervals)



code to a rate code at the interclick interval of about 25 ms, corresponding to a repetition rate of approximately 40 Hz (Figure 28–12A,B). This is near the boundary where our perception of a periodic click train changes from being "discrete" to "continuous." The combination of temporal and rate codes to represent the whole range of time-varying sounds is the consequence of a progressive transformation

beginning in the auditory nerve, where only a temporal code (phase-locking) is available. The progressive reduction in the upper limit of the phase-locking along the ascending auditory pathway is accompanied by the emergence of firing-rate-based representations. In the medial geniculate body of the thalamus, the intersection between temporal and rate codes is at a shorter interclick interval than in A1 (Figure 28–12C). This indicates that neurons in the medial geniculate body can phase-lock to more rapidly time-varying sounds than A1 neurons, but still utilize a rate code to represent rapidly changing sounds beyond their phase-locking limit. The prevalence of rate-coding neurons in A1 has important functional implications. It shows that a considerable transition from temporal to rate coding

0.6

<!-- image -->

has taken place by the time auditory signals reach the auditory cortex. The importance of the nonsynchronized neural responses is that they represent transformed instead of preserved temporal information. It suggests that cortical processing of sound streams operates on a segment-by-segment basis rather than on a moment-by-moment basis, as found in the auditory nerve. This is necessary for complex integration because higher-level processing tasks require temporal integration over a time window. The reduction in A1 of the upper limit of phase-locking is a prerequisite for multisensory integration in the cerebral cortex. Auditory information is encoded at the periphery at a much faster temporal modulation rate than visual or tactile information, but phase-locking is similar across

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 672

0.4

0.2



A. Stimulus-synchronized responses of a neuron to periodic

-

-

click trains recorded from A1 of an awake marmoset. The hori zontal bar below the x-axis indicates the duration of the stimu

lus. (Adapted, with permission, from Lu, Liang, and Wang 2001. Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.) B. Nonsynchronized responses of a neuron to periodic click trains recorded from A1 in an awake marmoset. (Adapted, with permission, from Lu, Liang, and Wang 2001. Copyright © 2001

- Springer Nature.) C. Comparison of temporal response properties between primary auditory cortex (A1) and medial geniculate body of the thalamus (MGB). Stimulus-synchronized responses are

quantified by vector strength, a measure of the strength of phase-locking. Nonsynchronized responses are quantified by the normalized firing rate (data curves identified as A1 rate and MGB rate). Error bars represent standard error of the mean. (Adapted, with permission, from Bartlett and Wang 2007.)

<!-- image -->

B Nonsynchronized responses

(responsive to short intervals)

<!-- image -->

1,500

C Transformation from MGB to A1

A1


1,500

MGB

A

Ve

ctor strength

09/12/20 5:03 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

primary sensory areas of the cortex. The slowing of


World primate species whose hearing range is similar

the phase-locking limit along the ascending auditory

pathway and accompanying transition from a tem-

poral code to a rate code are necessary for auditory information to be integrated in the cerebral cortex with information from other sensory modalities that are intrinsically slower. Primates Have Specialized Cortical Neurons That Encode Pitch and Harmonics

## Pitch perception is crucial for perceiving speech and music and for recognizing auditory objects in a com-

plex acoustic environment. Pitch is the percept that

allows harmonically structured periodic sounds to be perceived and ordered on a musical scale. Pitch carries crucial linguistic information in tonal languages such as Chinese and prosodic information in European languages. We use pitch to identify a particular voice from a noisy background in a cocktail party. When listening to an orchestra, we hear the melody of the soloist over the background of accompanying instruments. An important phenomenon for understanding pitch is the perception of "missing fundamental," also referred to as the residue pitch. When the harmonics

of a fundamental frequency are played together, the pitch is perceived as the fundamental frequency even if the fundamental frequency is missing. For example, the harmonics of the fundamental frequency of 200 Hz are at 400, 600, 800 Hz, and so on. Playing the frequencies 400, 600, and 800 Hz together will generate a pitch perception of 200 Hz, even though a distinct frequency component of 200 Hz is not physically present in the sound. We encounter this phenomenon routinely when we listen to music over speakers that are too small to generate sounds at low frequencies. Many combinations of frequencies can give rise to a common fundamental frequency or pitch, making it a particularly valuable auditory cue. This is especially

useful when pitch conveys behaviorally important information, as in the case of human speech or animal vocalizations. Sounds propagated through the environment can become spectrally degraded, losing high or low frequencies. While such spectral filtering distorts spectral information, the perception of the missing fundamental is robust despite the loss of some harmonic components. The ability to perceive pitch is not unique to humans; birds, cats, and monkeys can also pick out pitch. Monkeys are capable of spectral pitch discrimi-

nation, melody recognition, and octave generalization, each of which requires the perception of pitch. Marmoset monkeys (Callithrix jacchus), a highly vocal New

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 673

to that of humans, exhibit human-like pitch percep-

tion. Marmosets are able to discriminate a missing

fundamental in harmonic sounds with a precision as small as one semitone for the periodicity above 440 Hz. Given that both humans and some animals experience a pitch that generalizes across a variety of sounds with the same periodicity (including

harmonic sounds with a missing fundamental), it is reasonable to expect that some neurons extract pitch from complex sounds. Xiaoqin Wang and his colleagues discovered a decade ago that a small region in the auditory cortex of marmoset monkeys contains "pitch-selective neurons." These neurons are tuned to pure tones with a best frequency and respond to harmonic complexes with a fundamental frequency near its best frequency even when the harmonics lay outside the neuron's excitatory-frequency response area (Figure 28–13A). A pitch-selective neuron responds to pitch-evoking sounds (eg, harmonic sounds, click trains) when the pitch is near the neuron's preferred best frequency.

Pitch-selective neurons increase their firing rates as the behavioral salience of pitch increases and prefer sounds with periodicity over aperiodic sounds. It is important to note that the pitch-selective neurons in marmoset monkeys, which extract and code for pitch embedded in harmonic sounds (a highly nonlinear computation), are distinctly different from neurons in subcortical areas or A1 that merely "reflect" information on pitch in their firing patterns. The region containing the pitch-selective neurons in marmoset monkeys is confined to the low-frequency border of A1, the rostral auditory cortex (area R), and

lateral belt areas (Figure 28–13B). Human imaging studies have identified a restricted region at the lateral end of Heschl's gyrus anterolateral to A1 that extracts pitch of harmonic complex sounds and is sensitive to changes in pitch salience. The location of this region mirrors the location of the pitch center in marmoset monkeys (Figure 28–13B). The core regions of auditory cortex in marmosets also contain a class of harmonic template neurons that respond weakly or not at all to pure tones or two-

tone combinations but respond strongly to particular combinations of multiple harmonics. The harmonic template neurons show stronger responses to harmonic sounds than inharmonic sounds and selectiv -ity for particular harmonic structures. In contrast to the pitch-selective neurons that are localized within a small cortical region lateral to the low-frequency border between A1 and R and have best frequencies

09/12/20 5:03 PM


Part IV / Perception

A

primate auditory cortex.

f


<!-- image -->

A. An example of a pitch-selective neuron recorded from

marmoset auditory cortex. Left: Frequency spectra of a series of harmonic stimuli that share the same fundamental fre -

quency (f 0 ). Right: Peristimulus time histogram of the neuron's response to the stimuli (stimulus duration indicated by the shaded region). (Adapted, with permission, from Bendor and Wang 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)

less than 1,000 Hz, the harmonic template neurons are

distributed across A1 and R and have best frequencies

ranging from approximately 1 kHz to approximately

32 kHz, a range that covers the entire hearing range of marmosets. Whereas in the periphery single auditory nerve fibers encode individual components of harmonic sounds, the properties of the harmonic template neu-

rons reveal harmonically structured receptive fields for extracting harmonic patterns. The change in neural representation of harmonic sounds from auditory

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 674

Neuronal response

Stimulus

600 900 1,200

BF (kHz)

- B. Anatomical organization of the marmoset auditory cortex
2. and the location of a pitch center. Top: Side view of the mar-

moset brain. Bottom: Tonotopic map of the left auditory cortex

characterized in one marmoset. Pitch-selective neurons (black

squares) are clustered near the low-frequency border between A1 and area R (rostral auditory cortex). Frequency reversals indicate the borders between A1/R and R/RT (rostrotemporal auditory cortex). (BF: best frequency.) (Adapted from Bendor and Wang 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)

nerve fibers to the auditory cortex reflects a principle

of neural coding in sensory systems. Neurons in sen-

sory pathways transform the representation of physi-

cal features, such as the frequency of sounds in hearing or luminance of images in vision, into a representation of perceptual features, such as pitch in hearing or curvature in vision. Such features lead to the formation of auditory or visual percepts. The harmonic template neurons in the auditory cortex are key to processing sounds with harmonic structures such as animal vocal -izations, human speech, and music.

09/12/20 5:03 PM

Common-pitch stimuli Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System Insectivorous Bats Have Cortical Areas Specialized


The CF components of bat calls are used to deter-

for Behaviorally Relevant Features of Sound

## Although it is generally assumed that upstream auditory areas perform increasingly specialized functions related to hearing, much less is known about the

functions of serial relays in the auditory system compared to the visual system. In humans, one of the most important aspects of audition is its role in processing language, but we know relatively little about how speech sounds are analyzed by neural circuits. New techniques for imaging the human brain are gradually providing insights into the functional specialization of cortical areas associated with language (Chapter 55). Evidence for specialized analysis of complex auditory signals in the cerebral cortex comes from studies of insectivorous bats. These animals find their

prey almost entirely through echolocation, emitting ultrasonic pulses of sound that are reflected by flying insects. Bats analyze the timing and structure of the echoes to help locate and identify the targets, and discrete auditory areas are devoted to processing different aspects of the echoes. Many bats, such as the mustached bat studied by Nobuo Suga and his collaborators, emit echolocating pulses with two components. An initial constant-frequency

(CF) component consists of several harmonically related sounds. These harmonics are emitted stably for tens to hundreds of milliseconds, akin to human vowel sounds. The constant-frequency component is followed by a sound that decreases steeply in frequency, the frequency-modulated (FM) component, which resembles the rapidly changing frequency of human consonants (Figure 28–14A). The FM sounds are used to determine the distance to the target. The bat measures the interval between the emitted sound and the returning echo, which corre-

sponds to a particular distance, based on the relatively constant speed of sound. Neurons in the FM-FM area of auditory cortex (Figure 28–14B) respond preferentially to pulse-echo pairs separated by a specific delay. Moreover, these neurons respond better to particular combinations of sounds than to the individual sounds in isolation; such neurons are called feature detectors (Figure 28–14C). The FM-FM area contains an array of such detectors, with preferred delays systematically ranging from 0.4 to 18 ms, corresponding to target ranges of 7 to 280 cm (Figure 28–14B). These neurons are organized in columns, each of which is responsive to a particular combination of stimulus frequency and delay. In this way, the bat, like the barn owl in its inferior colliculus, is able to represent an acoustic feature that is not directly represented by sensory receptors.

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 675

mine both the speed of the target relative to the bat and

the acoustic image of the target. When an echolocat-

ing bat is flying toward an insect, the sounds reflected from the insect are Doppler-shifted to a higher frequency at the bat's ear, for the bat is moving toward the returning sound waves from the target, causing a relative speeding up of these waves at its ear. Similarly, a receding insect yields reflections of lowered frequency at the bat's ear. Neurons in the CF-CF area (Figure 28–14B) are sharply tuned to a combination of frequencies close to the emitted frequency or its harmonics. Each neuron responds best to a combination of a pulse of a particular fundamental frequency with an echo corresponding to the first or second harmonic of the pulse, Doppler-shifted to a specific extent. As in the FM-FM area, neurons do not respond to the pulse or echo alone, but rather to the combination of the two CF signals. CF-CF neurons are arranged in columns, each encoding a particular combination of frequencies. These columns are arranged regularly along the corti-

cal surface, with the fundamental frequency along one axis and the echo harmonics along a perpendicular axis. This dual-frequency coordinate system creates a map wherein a specific location corresponds to a particular Doppler shift and thus a particular target velocity, ranging systematically from –2 m/s to 9 m/s. The CF components of returning echoes are also used for detailed frequency analysis of the acoustic image, presumably important in its identification. The

Doppler-shifted constant-frequency area (DSCF) of the mustached bat is a dramatic expansion of the primary auditory cortex's representation of frequencies between 60 kHz and 62 kHz, corresponding well to the set of returning echoes from the major CF component of the bat's call (Figure 28–14B). Within the DSCF area, individual neurons are extremely sharply tuned to frequency, so that the tiny changes in frequency created by fluttering moth wings are easily detected. Transient inactivation of some of these specialized cortical areas while the bat performs a discrimination task strikingly supports the importance of their func-

tional specialization in behavior. Silencing of the DSCF selectively impairs fine frequency discrimination while leaving time perception intact. Conversely, inactivation of the FM-FM area impairs the bat's ability to detect small differences in the time of arrival of two echoes, while leaving frequency perception unchanged. Investigation of this auditory system was greatly facilitated by knowledge of the stimuli relevant to bats. It remains to be seen whether these cortical areas are

functionally or anatomically analogous to particular

09/12/20 5:03 PM


Part IV / Perception

A


CF


FM


Figure 28–14 The auditory system of the bat has special-

ized areas for locating sounds.

Pulse

<!-- image -->

A. A sonogram of an animal's calls (solid lines) and the result-

ant echoes (dashed lines) illustrates the two components of the call: the protracted, harmonically related constant-

frequency (CF) signal and the briefer frequency-modulated (FM) signal. The duration of the calls declines as the animal approaches its target. (Adapted, with permission, from Suga 1984.) B. A view of the cerebral hemisphere of the mustached bat shows three of the functional areas within the auditory cortex. The FM area is where the distance from the target is

computed; the CF area is where the velocity of the target is

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 676


2 mm

FM area

Pulse and echo

not closely paired

computed; and the Doppler-shifted CF area is specialized for

the identification of small fluttering objects. The expanded

cortical representation of Doppler-shifted CF signals near the

second harmonic of the call frequency (60–62 kHz) forms the acoustic "fovea." (Adapted, with permission, from Suga 1984.) C. The FM-FM combination-sensitive neuron shown does not respond significantly to either pulses or echoes alone, but responds very strongly to a closely paired pulse-echo. However,

the neuron is also sensitive to the time difference between the

pulse and echo, as seen in the record on the right, where the neuron fails to respond to a pulse-echo combination that is not closely paired. (Adapted, with permission, from Suga et al. 1983.)

Echo

09/12/20 5:03 PM
Part IV / Perception

A


CF


FM


Figure 28–14 The auditory system of the bat has special-

ized areas for locating sounds.

Pulse

<!-- image -->

A. A sonogram of an animal's calls (solid lines) and the result-

ant echoes (dashed lines) illustrates the two components of the call: the protracted, harmonically related constant-

frequency (CF) signal and the briefer frequency-modulated (FM) signal. The duration of the calls declines as the animal approaches its target. (Adapted, with permission, from Suga 1984.) B. A view of the cerebral hemisphere of the mustached bat shows three of the functional areas within the auditory cortex. The FM area is where the distance from the target is

computed; the CF area is where the velocity of the target is

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 676


2 mm

FM area

Pulse and echo

not closely paired

computed; and the Doppler-shifted CF area is specialized for

the identification of small fluttering objects. The expanded

cortical representation of Doppler-shifted CF signals near the

second harmonic of the call frequency (60–62 kHz) forms the acoustic "fovea." (Adapted, with permission, from Suga 1984.) C. The FM-FM combination-sensitive neuron shown does not respond significantly to either pulses or echoes alone, but responds very strongly to a closely paired pulse-echo. However,

the neuron is also sensitive to the time difference between the

pulse and echo, as seen in the record on the right, where the neuron fails to respond to a pulse-echo combination that is not closely paired. (Adapted, with permission, from Suga et al. 1983.)

Echo

09/12/20 5:03 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

fields in cats, monkeys, and humans. Regardless, the


production circuits. In humans, vocal production is

choice of appropriate stimuli is likely to be as impor-

tant in studying these other species as it has been in

studies of bats. The Auditory Cortex Is Involved in Processing Vocal Feedback During Speaking

## Vocal communication involves both speaking and hearing, often taking place concurrently. When we speak, the sound of our voice is delivered not only to

the intended listener but also back to our own ears. Such feedback to our auditory system during vocal production is conducted not only through the air but also through bone and can be loud as a result of the proximity of the mouth and the ears. The auditory system must distinguish an auditory percept as being self-generated or externally generated. To monitor external sounds from the acoustic environ carried out by cortical areas in the frontal lobe, from Broca's area to premotor and motor cortex. In humans and monkeys, axons from the premotor cortex to auditory regions of the superior temporal gyrus have been described, and presumably, they mediate the vocalization-induced suppression. This modulatory connection is not active when humans or monkeys simply listen to vocal sounds played to them. Why do we suppress our auditory cortex when we speak? A simple answer is that this suppression helps reduce the masking effect of our own voice, which can

ment during speaking, self-generated sounds have to be masked. At the same time, the auditory system must also monitor our own voice in order to detect errors in vocal production. An accurate representation of one's own voice through vocal feedback is crucial to maintaining desired vocal production and to the learning of a new language. In humans and animals, perturbations of the vocal feedback can lead to alterations in vocal production, and interruptions or blockages of the vocal feedback can result in degradation in vocal learning. The evidence for the involvement of the auditory cortex in processing vocal feedback comes from both human and animal studies. Responses in the audi-

tory cortex of human subjects to their own voice while speaking are smaller than the responses to the playback of the same sounds. This reduction can be observed in electrocorticographical (ECoG) recordings (Figure 28–15A) or with a variety of imaging methods (eg, fMRI, PET, magnetoencephalography [MEG]). Single-neuron recordings from the auditory cortex of vocalizing monkeys have shown that self-initiated vocalizations result in suppression of cortical responses

-be very loud. A more interesting answer is that this suppression results from a vocal feedback-monitoring network in auditory cortex. In humans, there is less or no suppression of auditory cortex if vocal feedback is experimentally altered through earphones, for example, when the pitch of the voice is shifted (Figure 28–15A). In marmoset monkeys, neurons suppressed by self-initiated vocalizations may become less suppressed or even excited when the animal hears its own frequency-shifted vocalizations (Figure 28–15C). This sensitivity to feedback perturbations suggests that neurons exhibiting vocalization-induced suppression are part of a network responsible for monitoring vocal feedback signals. The presence of vocal feedback-related neural activity in the auditory cortex of both humans and monkeys suggests that the auditory cortex combines both internal modulation and vocal feedback responses, rather than merely responding to sensory signals coming through the ears. Not all neurons in the auditory cortex are suppressed by speaking or vocalizing. A smaller proportion (~30%) of neurons in marmoset A1 increase their

to monkeys' own vocalizations, of external sounds heard during vocalization, and also spontaneous activity (Figure 28–15B). Because in many instances firing rates are suppressed to below spontaneous activity, the suppression is likely caused by inhibition. Neurons suppressed by self-initiated vocalizations show frequency and intensity tuning, as is typical of auditory cortical neurons, and respond to the playback of vocalizations. The vocalization-induced suppression begins several hundred milliseconds prior to the onset of vocalization (Figure 28–15B), suggesting that these neurons responses during self-initiated vocalizations, consistent with their auditory response characteristics. In contrast to vocalization-induced suppression, vocalizationrelated excitation begins after the onset of vocalization and is likely the result of feedback through the ascending auditory pathway. The vocalization-related excitation may help maintain the sensitivity of the auditory cortex to the external acoustic environment during speaking or vocalizing. Vocalization-induced suppression of auditory responses has been observed in several mammalian subcortical structures, including the brain stem and

receive modulatory signals originating in vocal

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 677

inferior colliculus. Such suppression begins a few milliseconds before or is synchronized with vocal production. In contrast, cortical suppression begins several hundred milliseconds before the vocal onset. It is possible that subcortical suppression of auditory responses during speaking or vocalizing is initiated by cortical commands.

09/12/20 5:03 PM

A


ity to pitch perturbation in human cerebral cortex. 1. A subject's Pitch shift

vocalizations (red arrow) went through a digital signal proces-

<!-- image -->

sor that shifted pitch and delivered the distorted auditory feedback (blue arrow) to the subject's earphones. 2. Pitch track of an example trial shows the pitch recorded by the microphone (produced) and the pitch delivered to the earphones (heard). Shaded region indicates the time interval when the signal processor shifted the pitch by −200 cents (1 cent = 1/1200 octave). 3. The locations of electrodes that recorded from two sites in the auditory cortex on the surface of the superior temporal gyrus. 4. The Z variable represents the power in the 50 to 150 Hz (high-γ) range of cortical activity, which has been shown to correlate well with neuronal spiking activity. It was extracted from the signals recorded at each electrode in the speaking (red) and listening (blue) conditions. Vertical lines in the left column of plots indicate vocalization onset, and shaded regions in the right column of plots indicate the onset and offset of perturbation. The response of a subject's auditory cortex to his or her own self-produced vocalization is generally smaller than the response seen when the subject passively listens to playback of the same vocalization (left column). The response of auditory

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 678


B. 1. Vocalization-induced suppression of neural activity in marmoset monkey auditory cortex. Population-averaged firing rate of all vocalization-suppressed responses are aligned by vocal

onset (a "Phee" call). The blue line is a moving average (100 ms window) and shows that suppression begins prior to vocalization (indicated by arrow). The thick bar indicates the period over which suppression is continuously significant (P &lt;0.05). (Adapted, with permission, from Eliades and Wang 2003.) 2. Neurons subject to vocalization-induced suppression are sensitive to vocal feedback perturbations. Top: Self-produced vocalizations with or without feedback alterations were deliv -

ered to the marmoset through a customized headphone. Bottom: This auditory cortical neuron was suppressed during normal vocalization (dark blue) but showed a large increase in firing rate when the auditory feedback of the vocalization was shifted in the frequency domain (light blue). Amplifying auditory feedback alone did not generate firing rate changes (black). (Adapted, with permission, from Eliades and Wang 2008; Crapse and Sommer 2008.)

0.5 1

Time (s)

Baseline

Frequency

shifted

Amplied


Speech onset

09/12/20 5:03 PM

Highlights

1.

Sound impinging on two ears carries informa-

tion that the brain uses to compute where sounds

arise and what they mean. Sounds are charac-

- terized by the amount of energy at one or more frequencies. To determine where sounds arise in the horizontal plane, many mammals compute differences in the time of arrival at the two ears for sounds less than approximately 3,000 Hz. To determine where sounds arise in the vertical dimension and whether they arise from the front or the back, mammals use spectral filtering of sounds greater than approximately 6,000 Hz by the head, shoulders, and external ears. 2. Acoustic information is brought to the brain from the cochlea by auditory nerve fibers, each sharply tuned to a narrow range of frequen-
- cies and together representing the entire hearing range of the animal. Auditory nerve fibers terminate in the ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei, distributing acoustic information to four major groups of principal cells that form parallel ascending pathways through the brain stem. The topographic organization of the auditory nerve inputs imparts a tonotopic organization to the ipsilateral cochlear nuclei that is preserved all along the auditory pathway, including auditory cortex. 3. A marked feature of auditory neurons at processing stations along the ascending pathway is their progressively increasing stimulus selectivity.

5.

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System


at the two ears, which are used to localize sound

sources along the azimuth.

The dorsal cochlear nucleus integrates acous-

- tic signals with somatosensory information in its principal cells. Somatosensory information
- helps distinguish the spectral cues generated by an animal's own movements, which are biologically uninteresting, from those that arise from the environment. 6. Auditory brainstem pathways converge in the inferior colliculus. The inferior colliculus feeds acoustic information through the medial genicu-
- late body of the thalamus to auditory cortex. 7. A projection from the inferior colliculus carries information about the location of sounds to the superior colliculus, a part of the brain that con-
- trols reflexive orienting movements of the head and eyes. 8. Within auditory cortex, auditory neurons continue to become more selective to the stimuli to which they respond. Subregions of the auditory
- cortex represent different biologically significant features such as pitch of tones that form harmonic complexes. Auditory cortex also transforms rapidly varying features of sounds into firingrate-based representations, while representing slowly varying sounds using spike timing. 9. Auditory circuits in the cerebral cortex are segregated into separate processing streams, with dorsal and ventral streams concerned respec-
- -tively with sound location in space and sound identification. 10. The cerebral cortex modulates processing in subcortical auditory areas. Projections from the auditory cortex innervate the thalamus, inferior
4. The ventral cochlear nucleus extracts three fea tures of sounds: (a) The monaural pathways through octopus cells of the ventral cochlear
- nucleus, the superior paraolivary nucleus, and ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus detect coincident firing of auditory nerve fibers that is useful for detecting onsets and gaps in sounds. (b) Stellate cells detect and sharpen the encoding of spectral peaks and valleys and convey that spectral information to the dorsal cochlear nucleus, olivocochlear neurons in the ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, inferior col liculus, and thalamus. Spectral information is used for understanding the meaning of sounds and for localizing their sources. (c) Bushy cells sharpen and convey information about the fine structure of sounds, which is used in the bin aural pathways through the medial and lateral superior olivary nuclei to make the interaural comparisons of timing and intensity of sounds

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 679

- colliculus, olivocochlear neurons, some basal ganglionic structures, and even the dorsal cochlear nucleus. 11. Auditory cortex is involved in processing vocal feedback signals during speaking. Speaking induces suppression of neural activity in audi-
- -tory cortex that begins several hundred milliseconds prior to the vocal onset. This suppression results from a vocal feedback-monitoring network that functions to guide vocal production and learning.

-

Donata Oertel

Xiaoqin Wang

09/12/20 5:03 PM


Part IV / Perception

Selected Reading

Bendor DA, Wang X. 2005. The neuronal representation of

pitch in primate auditory cortex. Nature 436:1161–1165.

Chase SM, Young ED. 2006. Spike-timing codes enhance

- the representation of multiple simultaneous soundlocalization cues in the inferior colliculus. J Neurosci
- 26:3889–3898. Eliades SJ, Wang X. 2008. Neural substrates of vocalization feedback monitoring in primate auditory cortex. Nature 453:1102–1106.
- Gao E, Suga N. 2000. Experience-dependent plasticity in the auditory cortex and the inferior colliculus of bats: role of the corticofugal system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 97:8081–8086. Hofman PM, Van Riswick JG, Van Opstal AJ. 1998. Relearning sound localization with new ears. Nat Neurosci 1:417–421.
- Joris PX, Smith PH, Yin TC. 1998. Coincidence detection in the auditory system: 50 years after Jeffress. Neuron 21:1235–1238.
- Joris PX, Yin TCT. 2007. A matter of time: internal delays in binaural processing. Trends Neurosci 30:70–78. Oertel D, Young ED. 2004. What's a cerebellar circuit doing in
- the auditory system? Trends Neurosci 27:104–110. Schneider DM, Mooney R. 2018. How movement modulates
- hearing. Annu Rev Neurosci 41:553–572. Schreiner CE, Read HL, Sutter ML. 2000. Modular organiza-
- tion of frequency integration in primary auditory cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:501–529.
- Suga N. 1990. Cortical computational maps for auditory imaging. Neural Netw 3:3–21. Wang X. 2018. Cortical coding of auditory features. Annu
- Rev Neurosci 41:527–552. Zhang LI, Bao S, Merzenich MM. 2001. Persistent and spe-
- cific influences of early acoustic environments on primary auditory cortex. Nat Neurosci 4:1123–1130.
- References

Bartlett EL, Wang X. 2007. Neural representations of

temporally-modulated signals in the auditory thalamus

of awake primates. J Neurophysiol 97:1005–1017.

- Bendor DA, Wang X. 2006. Cortical representations of pitch in monkeys and humans. Curr Opin Neurobiol 16:391–399. Brodal A. 1981. Neurological Anatomy in Relation to Clinical
- Medicine. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Cajal SR. 1909. Histologie du Systeme Nerveux de l'Homme et des
- Vertebres. Paris: A. Maloine. Cariani PA, Delgutte B. 1996. Neural correlates of the pitch of
- complex tones. I. Pitch and pitch salience. J Neurophysiol 76:1698–1716.
- Cohen YE, Knudsen EI. 1999. Maps versus clusters: different representations of auditory space in the midbrain and forebrain. Trends Neurosci 22:128–135.
- Crapse TB, Sommer MA. 2008. Corollary discharge circuits in the primate brain. Curr Opin Neurobiol 18:552–557.

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 680

Darrow KN, Maison SF, Liberman MC. 2006. Cochlear effer-

ent feedback balances interaural sensitivity. Nat Neurosci

9:1474–1476.

- Eliades SJ, Wang X. 2003. Sensory-motor interaction in the primate auditory cortex during self-initiated vocalizations. J Neurophysiol 89:2194–2207.
- Feng L, Wang X. 2017. Harmonic template neurons in primate auditory cortex underlying complex sound processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:E840–E848.
- Gao L, Kostlan K, Wang Y, Wang X. 2016. Distinct subthreshold mechanisms underlying rate-coding principles in primate auditory cortex. Neuron 91:905–919.
- Geisler CD. 1998. From Sound to Synapse, Physiology of the Mammalian Ear. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Houde JF, Chang EF 2015. The cortical computations under-
- lying feedback control in vocal production. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33:174–181.
- Hubel DH, Henson CO, Rupert A, Galambos R. 1959. Attention units in the auditory cortex. Science 129:1279–1280. Jeffress LA. 1948. A place theory of sound localization.
- J Comp Physiol Psychol 41:35–39. Kanold PO, Young ED. 2001. Proprioceptive information
- from the pinna provides somatosensory input to cat dorsal cochlear nucleus. J Neurosci 21:7848–7858.
- King AJ. 1999. Sensory experience and the formation of a computational map of auditory space in the brain. BioEssays 21:900–911.
- King AJ, Bajo VM, Bizley JK, et al. 2007. Physiological and behavioral studies of spatial coding in the auditory cortex. Hear Res 229:106–115.
- Liberman MC. 1978. Auditory-nerve response from cats raised in a low-noise chamber. J Acoust Soc Am 63:442–455. Lu T, Liang L, Wang X. 2001. Temporal and rate represen-
- tations of time-varying signals in the auditory cortex of awake primates. Nature Neurosci 4:1131–1138.
- Merzenich MM, Knight PL, Roth GL. 1975. Representation of cochlea within primary auditory cortex in the cat. J Neurophysiol 38:231–249.
- Mesgarani N, Cheung C, Johnson K, Chang EF. 2014. Phonetic feature encoding in human superior temporal gyrus. Science 343:1006–1010.
- Middlebrooks JC. 2005. Auditory cortex cheers the overture and listens through the finale. Nature Neurosci 8:851–852. Musicant AD, Chan JCK, Hind JE. 1990. Direction-dependent
- spectral properties of cat external ear: new data and crossspecies comparisons. J Acoust Soc Am 87:757–781.
- Oertel D, Bal R, Gardner SM, Smith PH, Joris PX. 2000. Detection of synchrony in the activity of auditory nerve fibers by octopus cells of the mammalian cochlear nucleus. Proc
- Nat Acad Sci U S A 97:11773–11779. Palmer AR, King AJ. 1982. The representation of auditory space in the mammalian superior colliculus. Nature 299:248–249.
- Penagos H, Melcher JR, Oxenham AJ. 2004. A neural representation of pitch salience in nonprimary human auditory cortex revealed with functional magnetic resonance imag-
- ing. J Neurosci 24:6810–6815.

09/12/20 5:03 PM

Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System

Raman IM, Zhang S, Trussell LO. 1994. Pathway-specific


Song X, Osmanski MS, Guo Y, Wang X. 2016. Complex pitch

variants of AMPA receptors and their contribution to neu-

ronal signaling. J Neurosci 14:4998–5010.

- Rauschecker JP, Tian B. 2000. Mechanisms and streams for processing of "what" and "where" in auditory cortex. Proc Nat Acad Sci U S A 97:11800–11806.
- Rauschecker JP, Tian B, Hauser M. 1995. Processing of complex sounds in the macaque nonprimary auditory cortex. Science 268:111–114.
- Recanzone GH, Schreiner CE, Merzenich MM. 1993. Plasticity in the frequency representation of primary auditory cortex following discrimination training in adult owl
- monkeys. J Neurosci 13:87–103. Remington ED, Wang X. 2019. Neural representations of the full spatial field in auditory cortex of awake marmoset (Callithrix jacchus). Cereb Cortex 29:1199–1216.
- Riquimaroux H, Gaioni SJ, Suga N. 1991. Cortical computational maps control auditory perception. Science 251: 565–568.
- Romanski LM, Averbeck BB. 2009. The primate cortical auditory system and neural representation of conspecific vocalizations. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:315–346.
- Sadagopan S, Wang X. 2009. Nonlinear spectrotemporal interactions underlying selectivity for complex sounds in auditory cortex. J Neurosci 29:11192–11202.
- Schreiner CE, Winer JA. 2007. Auditory cortex mapmaking: principles, projections, and plasticity. Neuron 56: 356–365.
- Scott LL, Mathews PJ, Golding NL. 2005. Posthearing developmental refinement of temporal processing in principal neurons of the medial superior olive. J Neurosci 25:
- 7887–7895.

Kandel-Ch28\_0651-0681.indd 681

perception mechanisms are shared by humans and a New

World monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:781–786.

- Spirou GA, Young ED. 1991. Organization of dorsal cochlear nucleus type IV unit response maps and their relationship to activation by bandlimited noise. J Neurophysiol
- 66:1750–1768. Suga N, O'Neill WE, Kujirai K, Manabe T. 1983. Specificity of combination-sensitive neurons for processing of complex biosonar signals in auditory cortex of the mustached bat.
- J Neurophysiol 49:1573–626. Suga N. 1984. Neural mechanisms of complex-sound processing for echolocation. Trends Neurosci 7:20–27. Tollin DJ, Yin TC. 2002. The coding of spatial location by
- single units in the lateral superior olive of the cat. II. The determinants of spatial receptive fields in azimuth.
- J Neurosci 22:1468–1479. Wang X, Lu T, Snider RK, Liang L. 2005. Sustained firing in auditory cortex evoked by preferred stimuli. Nature 435:341–346.
- Warr WB. 1992. Organization of olivocochlear efferent systems in mammals. In: DB Webster, AN Popper, RR Fay (eds). The Mammalian Auditory Pathway: Neuroanatomy,
- pp. 410–448. New York: Springer. Winer JA, Saint Marie RL, Larue DT, Oliver DL. 1996. GABAergic feedforward projections from the inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate body. Proc Natl Acad Sci
- U S A 93:8005–8010. Yin TCT. 2002. Neural mechanisms of encoding binaural localization cues in the auditory brainstem. In: D Oertel, RR Fay, AN Popper (eds). Integrative Functions in the Mam-
- malian Auditory Pathway, pp. 238–288. New York: Springer.

09/12/20 5:03 PM


Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses

A Large Family of Olfactory Receptors Initiate the

Sense of Smell

Mammals Share a Large Family of Odorant Receptors

## Different Combinations of Receptors Encode Different Odorants

Olfactory Information Is Transformed Along the Pathway

to the Brain Odorants Are Encoded in the Nose by

## Dispersed Neurons Sensory Inputs in the Olfactory Bulb Are Arranged by

Receptor Type The Olfactory Bulb Transmits Information to the

Olfactory Cortex Output From the Olfactory Cortex Reaches Higher

Cortical and Limbic Areas Olfactory Acuity Varies in Humans

Odors Elicit Characteristic Innate Behaviors

Pheromones Are Detected in Two Olfactory Structures

## Invertebrate Olfactory Systems Can Be Used to Study Odor Coding and Behavior

Olfactory Cues Elicit Stereotyped Behaviors and

Physiological Responses in the Nematode Strategies for Olfaction Have Evolved Rapidly

The Gustatory System Controls the Sense of Taste

Taste Has Five Submodalities That Reflect Essential Dietary Requirements

## Tastant Detection Occurs in Taste Buds

Each Taste Modality Is Detected by Distinct Sensory Receptors and Cells

Gustatory Information Is Relayed From the Periphery to

the Gustatory Cortex

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 682

Perception of Flavor Depends on Gustatory, Olfactory,

and Somatosensory Inputs

Insects Have Modality-Specific Taste Cells That Drive

Innate Behaviors Highlights

T

hrough the senses of smell and taste, we are

able to perceive a staggering number and variety

of chemicals in the external world. These chemi

-

-

cal senses inform us about the availability of foods and their potential pleasure or danger. Smell and taste also initiate physiological changes required for the digestion and utilization of food. In many animals, the olfactory system also serves an important social function by detecting pheromones that elicit innate behavioral or physiological responses. Although the discriminatory ability of humans is somewhat limited compared with that of many other animals, odor chemists estimate that the human olfac

tory system may be capable of detecting more than 10,000 different volatile chemicals. Perfumers who are highly trained to discriminate odorants can distinguish as many as 5,000 different types of odorants, and wine tasters can discern more than 100 different components of taste based on combinations of flavor and aroma. In this chapter, we consider how odor and taste stimuli are detected and how they are encoded in patterns of neural signals transmitted to the brain. In

recent years, much has been learned about the mechanisms underlying chemosensation in a variety of animal species. Certain features of chemosensation have

12/12/20 3:19 PM

been conserved through evolution, whereas others are

specialized adaptations of individual species.

A Large Family of Olfactory Receptors Initiate

the Sense of Smell

## Odorants—volatile chemicals that are perceived as odors—are detected by olfactory sensory neurons

in the nose. The sensory neurons are embedded in a Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


specialized olfactory epithelium that lines part of the

nasal cavity, approximately 5 cm


in area in humans

(Figure 29–1), and are interspersed with glia-like sup-

porting cells (Figure 29–2). They are relatively short lived, with a life span of only 30 to 60 days, and are continuously replaced from a layer of basal stem cells in the epithelium. The olfactory sensory neuron is a bipolar nerve cell. A single dendrite extends from the apical end to the epithelial surface, where it gives rise to numerous

Pyramidal

Olfactory cortex

dendrites of mitral and tufted cell relay neurons within glomer-

uli. In turn, the axons of the relay neurons project to the olfac-

tory cortex, where they terminate on the dendrites of pyramidal

<!-- image -->

lines part of the nasal cavity. The axons of these neurons

project to the olfactory bulb, where they terminate on the

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 683

neurons whose axons project to other brain areas.

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

A

To olfactory bulb

<!-- image -->

A. The olfactory epithelium contains sensory neurons inter-

spersed with supporting cells as well as a basal layer of stem

cells. A single dendrite extends from the apical end of each

neuron; sensory cilia sprout from the end of the dendrite into the mucus lining the nasal cavity. An axon extends from the basal end of each neuron to the olfactory bulb. thin cilia that protrude into the mucus that coats the

nasal cavity (Figure 29–2). The cilia contain the odor-

ant receptors as well as the transduction machinery

needed to amplify sensory signals from the receptors and transform them into electrical signals in the neuron's axon, which projects from the basal pole of the neuron to the brain. The axons of olfactory sensory neurons pass through the cribriform plate, a perforated region in the skull above the nasal cavity, and then terminate in the olfactory bulb (see Figure 29–1). Mammals Share a Large Family of Odorant Receptors

## Odorant receptors are proteins encoded by a multigene family that is evolutionarily conserved and

found in all vertebrate species. Humans have approxi-

mately 350 different odorant receptors, whereas mice have approximately 1,000. Although odorant receptors belong to the G protein–coupled receptor superfamily, they share sequence motifs not seen in other superfamily members. Significantly, the odorant receptors vary considerably in amino acid sequence (Figure 29–3A).

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 684

Axon

Olfactory

sensory

neuron

Dendrite

Cilia

B

<!-- image -->

B

B. A scanning electron micrograph of the olfactory epithelium

shows the dense mat of sensory cilia at the epithelial surface. Sup-

porting cells (S) are columnar cells that extend the full depth of the

- epithelium and have apical microvilli. Interspersed among the supporting cells is an olfactory sensory neuron (O) with its dendrite and cilia, and a basal stem cell (B). (Reproduced, with permission, from Morrison and Costanzo 1990. Copyright © 1990 Wiley-Liss, Inc.) Like other G protein–coupled receptors, odorant

receptors have seven hydrophobic regions that are

likely to serve as transmembrane domains (Figure

29–3A). Detailed studies of other G protein–coupled receptors, such as the β-adrenergic receptor, suggest that odorant binding occurs in a pocket in the transmembrane region formed by a combination of the transmembrane domains. The amino acid sequences of odorant receptors are especially variable in several transmembrane domains, providing a possible basis for variability in the odorant binding pocket that could account for the ability of different receptors to recognize structurally diverse ligands. A second, smaller family of chemosensory receptors is also expressed in the olfactory epithelium. These receptors, called trace amine-associated recep-

tors (TAARs), are G protein–coupled, but their protein sequence is unrelated to that of odorant receptors. They are encoded by a small family of genes present in humans and mice as well as fish. Studies in mice, which have 14 different olfactory TAARs, indicate that TAARs recognize volatile amines, one of which is present in high concentrations in the urine of male

12/12/20 3:20 PM

B

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses

Cyclic nucleotide–

gated channel

Extracellular

side

Cytoplasmic

side

leading to an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate

Adenylyl

cyclase III

<!-- image -->

characteristic of G protein–coupled receptors. They are related

to one another but vary in amino acid sequence (positions of

highest variability are shown here as black balls). (Reproduced, with permission, from Buck and Axel 1991.) B. Binding of an odorant causes the odorant receptor to interact with Gαo αolf , the α-subunit of a heterotrimeric G

- mice and another in the urine of some predators. It is possible that this small receptor family has a function

distinct from that of the odorant receptor family, per-

haps one associated with the detection of animal cues. Another family of 12 receptors, called MS4Rs, is also found in mice, where it may be involved in the detection of pheromones and certain food odors. The binding of an odorant to its receptor induces a cascade of intracellular signaling events that depolarize the olfactory sensory neuron (Figure 29–3B). The

depolarization spreads passively to the cell body and then the axon, where action potentials are generated that are actively conducted to the olfactory bulb. Humans and other animals rapidly accommodate to odors, as seen for example in the weakening of detection of an unpleasant odor that is continuously

present. The ability to sense an odorant rapidly recovers when the odorant is temporarily removed. The adaptation to odorants is caused in part by modulation

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 685

(cAMP). The elevated cAMP in turn induces the opening of cyclic nucleotide–gated cation channels, causing cation influx and a change in membrane potential in the ciliary membrane.

of a cyclic nucleotide–gated ion channel in olfactory

cilia, but the mechanism by which sensitivity is speed-

ily restored is not yet understood.

Different Combinations of Receptors Encode Different Odorants

## To be distinguished perceptually, different odorants must cause different signals to be transmitted from the

nose to the brain. This is accomplished in two ways.

First, each olfactory sensory neuron expresses only one odorant receptor gene and therefore one type of receptor. Second, each receptor recognizes multiple odorants, and conversely, each odorant is detected by multiple different receptors (Figure 29–4). Importantly, however, each odorant is detected, and thereby encoded, by a unique combination of receptors and thus causes a distinctive pattern of signals to be transmitted to the brain.

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Odorants
B

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses

Cyclic nucleotide–

gated channel

Extracellular

side

Cytoplasmic

side

leading to an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate

Adenylyl

cyclase III

<!-- image -->

characteristic of G protein–coupled receptors. They are related

to one another but vary in amino acid sequence (positions of

highest variability are shown here as black balls). (Reproduced, with permission, from Buck and Axel 1991.) B. Binding of an odorant causes the odorant receptor to interact with Gαo αolf , the α-subunit of a heterotrimeric G

- mice and another in the urine of some predators. It is possible that this small receptor family has a function

distinct from that of the odorant receptor family, per-

haps one associated with the detection of animal cues. Another family of 12 receptors, called MS4Rs, is also found in mice, where it may be involved in the detection of pheromones and certain food odors. The binding of an odorant to its receptor induces a cascade of intracellular signaling events that depolarize the olfactory sensory neuron (Figure 29–3B). The

depolarization spreads passively to the cell body and then the axon, where action potentials are generated that are actively conducted to the olfactory bulb. Humans and other animals rapidly accommodate to odors, as seen for example in the weakening of detection of an unpleasant odor that is continuously

present. The ability to sense an odorant rapidly recovers when the odorant is temporarily removed. The adaptation to odorants is caused in part by modulation

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 685

(cAMP). The elevated cAMP in turn induces the opening of cyclic nucleotide–gated cation channels, causing cation influx and a change in membrane potential in the ciliary membrane.

of a cyclic nucleotide–gated ion channel in olfactory

cilia, but the mechanism by which sensitivity is speed-

ily restored is not yet understood.

Different Combinations of Receptors Encode Different Odorants

## To be distinguished perceptually, different odorants must cause different signals to be transmitted from the

nose to the brain. This is accomplished in two ways.

First, each olfactory sensory neuron expresses only one odorant receptor gene and therefore one type of receptor. Second, each receptor recognizes multiple odorants, and conversely, each odorant is detected by multiple different receptors (Figure 29–4). Importantly, however, each odorant is detected, and thereby encoded, by a unique combination of receptors and thus causes a distinctive pattern of signals to be transmitted to the brain.

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Odorants



Part IV / Perception

Odorants Odorant receptors Odors Rancid, sour, goat-like Sweet, herbal, woody Rancid, sour, sweaty Violet, sweet, woody Rancid, sour, repulsive Sweet, orange, rose Waxy, cheese, nut-like Fresh, rose, oily oral in the figure were obtained by testing mouse olfactory sensory neurons with different odorants and then determining the odor- ant receptor gene expressed by each responsive neuron. The

<!-- image -->

multiple odorants, but different odorants are detected, and thus

encoded, by different combinations of receptors. This combinatorial coding explains how mammals can distinguish odorants with similar chemical structures as having different scents. The data The combinatorial coding of odorants greatly expands the discriminatory power of the olfactory sys-

tem. If each odorant were detected by only three dif-

ferent receptors, this strategy could in theory generate millions of different combinatorial receptor codes— and an equivalently vast number of different signaling patterns sent from the nose to the brain. Interestingly, even odorants with nearly identical structures are recognized by different combinations of receptors (Figure 29–4). The fact that highly related odorants have different combinatorial receptor codes explains why a slight change in the chemical structure of an odorant can alter its perceived odor. In some cases, the result is dramatic, for example, changing the perception of a chemical from rose to sour. A change in concentration of an odorant can also change the perceived odor. For example, a low concentration of thioterpineol smells like tropical fruit, perceived qualities of these odorants in humans shown on the right illustrate how highly related odorants can have different scents. (Adapted, with permission, from Malnic et al. 1999.) Olfactory Information Is Transformed Along the Pathway to the Brain

## Odorants Are Encoded in the Nose by Dispersed Neurons

## How are signals from a large array of different odorant receptors organized in the nervous system to

generate diverse odor perceptions? This question

has been investigated in rodents. Studies in mice have revealed that olfactory information undergoes a series of transformations as it travels from the olfactory epithelium to the olfactory bulb and then to the olfactory cortex. The olfactory epithelium has a series of spatial zones that express different olfactory receptors. Each receptor type is expressed in approximately 5,000

-neurons that are confined to one zone (Figure 29–5). (Recall that each neuron expresses only one odorant receptor gene.) Neurons with the same receptor are randomly scattered within a zone so neurons with different receptors are interspersed. All zones contain a variety of receptors, and a specific odorant may be recognized by receptors in different zones. Thus, despite a rough organization of odorant receptors into spatial

12/12/20 3:20 PM

whereas a higher concentration smells like grapefruit and an even higher concentration smells putrid. As the concentration of an odorant is increased, addi tional receptors with lower affinity for the odorant are recruited into the response and thus change the combinatorial receptor code, providing an explanation for the effects of odorant concentration on perception.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 686

Olfactory

epithelium Olfactory bulb Odorant receptor expressed K20

<!-- image -->

K21

L45

A16

OMP

(all

odorant

receptors)

tory epithelium. The olfactory epithelium has different spatial

zones that express different sets of odorant receptor genes.

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


zones, information provided by the odorant receptor

family is highly distributed in the epithelium.

Because each odorant is detected by an ensemble

of neurons widely dispersed across the epithelial sheet, receptors in one part of the epithelium will be able to

detect a particular odorant even when those in another part are impaired by respiratory infection. Sensory Inputs in the Olfactory Bulb Are Arranged by Receptor Type

## The axons of olfactory sensory neurons project to the ipsilateral olfactory bulb, whose rostral end lies just above the olfactory epithelium. The axons of olfactory

sensory neurons terminate on the dendrites of olfactory bulb neurons within bundles of neuropil called glomeruli that are arrayed over the bulb's surface (Figure 29–1). In each glomerulus, the sensory axons make synaptic connections with three types of neurons: mitral and tufted projection (relay) neurons, which project axons to the olfactory cortex, and periglomerular interneurons, which encircle the glomerulus (Figure 29–6).

Granule

cell

Each sensory neuron expresses only one receptor gene and thus one type of receptor. Neurons with the same receptor are confined to one zone but randomly scattered within that zone, such that neurons with different receptors are interspersed. The micrographs show the distribution of neurons labeled by four different receptor probes in sections through the mouse nose. An olfactory marker protein (OMP) probe labels all neurons expressing odorant receptors. (Adapted, with permission, from Ressler, Sullivan, and Buck 1993; Sullivan et al. 1996.)

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 687

dendrites of GABAergic periglomerular cells receive excitatory input from olfactory sensory neurons and have reciprocal synapses with the primary dendrites of mitral and tufted relay neurons, suggesting a possible role in signal modification. The dendrites of GABAergic granule cells deeper in the bulb have reciprocal excitatory-inhibitory synapses with the secondary dendrites of the relay neurons and are thought to provide negative feedback to relay neurons that shapes the odor response. (Adapted from Shepherd and Greer 1998.)

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Peri-

glomerular

cell


Part IV / Perception

The axon of an olfactory sensory neuron as well as

the primary dendrite of each mitral and tufted relay

neuron terminate in a single glomerulus. In each glo-

merulus, the axons of several thousand sensory neurons converge on the dendrites of approximately 40 to 50 relay neurons. This convergence results in approximately a 100-fold decrease in the number of neurons transmitting olfactory signals. The organization of sensory information in the olfactory bulb is dramatically different from that of the epithelium. Whereas olfactory sensory neurons with

the same odorant receptor are randomly scattered in one epithelial zone, their axons typically converge in two glomeruli at specific locations, one on either side of the olfactory bulb (Figure 29–7C). Each glomerulus, and each mitral and tufted relay neuron connected to it, receives input from just one type of odorant receptor. The result is a precise arrangement of sensory inputs from different odorant receptors, one that is similar between individuals. Because each odorant is recognized by a unique combination of receptor types, each also activates a particular combination of glomeruli in the olfactory

bulb (Figure 29–7B). At the same time, just as one odorant receptor recognizes multiple odorants, a single glomerulus—or a given mitral or tufted cell—is activated by more than one odorant. Owing to the nearly stereotyped pattern of receptor inputs in the olfactory bulb, the patterns of glomerular activation elicited by individual odorants are similar in all individuals and are bilaterally symmetrical in the two adjacent bulbs. This organization of sensory information in the olfactory bulb is likely to be advantageous in two respects. First, signals from thousands of sensory neu-

rons with the same odorant receptor type always converge on the same few glomeruli, and relay neurons in the olfactory bulb may optimize the detection of odorants present at low concentrations. Second, although olfactory sensory neurons with the same receptor type are dispersed and are continually replaced, the arrangement of inputs in the olfactory bulb remains unaltered. As a result, the neural code for an odorant in the brain is maintained over time, assuring that an odorant encountered previously can be recognized years later. One mystery that remains unsolved is how all the axons of olfactory sensory neurons with the same type of receptor are directed to the same glomeruli. Studies

using transgenic mice indicate that the odorant receptor itself somehow determines the target of the axon, but how it does so is not yet understood. Sensory information is processed and possibly refined in the olfactory bulb before it is forwarded

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 688

to the olfactory cortex. Each glomerulus is encircled

by periglomerular interneurons that receive excita-

tory input from sensory axons and form inhibitory

dendrodendritic synapses with mitral and tufted cell dendrites in that glomerulus and perhaps adjacent glomeruli. The periglomerular interneurons may therefore have a role in signal modulation. In addition, granule cell interneurons deep in the bulb provide negative feedback onto mitral and tufted cells. The granule cell interneurons are excited by the basal dendrites of mitral and tufted cells and in turn inhibit those relay neurons and others with which they are connected. The lateral inhibition afforded by these connections is thought to dampen signals from glomeruli and relay neurons that respond to an odorant only weakly, thereby sharpening the contrast between important and irrelevant sensory information before its transmission to the cortex. Other potential sources of signal refinement are the retrograde projections to the olfactory bulb from the olfactory cortex, basal forebrain (horizontal limb of

the diagonal band), and midbrain (locus ceruleus and raphe nuclei). These connections may modulate olfactory bulb output according to the physiological or behavioral state of an animal. When the animal is hun -gry, for example, some centrifugal projections might heighten the perception of the aroma of foods. The Olfactory Bulb Transmits Information to the Olfactory Cortex

## The axons of the mitral and tufted relay neurons of the olfactory bulb project through the lateral olfactory tract to the olfactory cortex (Figure 29–8 and see

Figure 29–1). The olfactory cortex, defined roughly as that portion of the cortex that receives a direct projection from the olfactory bulb, comprises multiple anatomically distinct areas. The six major areas are the anterior olfactory nucleus, which connects the two olfactory bulbs through a portion of the anterior commissure; the anterior and posterior-lateral cortical nuclei of the amygdala; the olfactory tubercle; part of the entorhinal cortex; and the piriform cortex, the largest and considered the major olfactory cortical area. The functions of the different olfactory cortical areas are largely unknown. However, the piriform cortex is thought to be important for odor learning.

Recent studies indicate that the posterior-lateral cortical amygdala may have a role in innate attraction and fear behaviors, and the amygdalo-piriform transition area, a minor olfactory cortical area, a role in stress hormone responses to predator odors detected in the nose. In the piriform cortex, the axons of olfactory bulb mitral and tufted cells leave the lateral olfactory tract

12/12/20 3:20 PM

A Axons of neurons with the same odorant receptor

converge on a few glomeruli B One odorant can activate many glomeruli

<!-- image -->

- Glomeruli

A. The axons of sensory neurons with the same odorant recep-

<!-- image -->

tor type usually converge in only two glomeruli, one on each

side of the olfactory bulb. Here, a probe specific for one odor-

ant receptor gene labeled a glomerulus on the medial side (left) and lateral side (right) of a mouse olfactory bulb. The probe hybridized to receptor messenger RNAs present in sensory axons in these coronal sections. (Adapted, with permission, from Ressler, Sullivan, and Buck 1994.) B. A single odorant often activates multiple glomeruli with input from different receptors. This section of a rat olfactory bulb shows the uptake of radiolabeled 2-deoxglucose

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 689

at multiple foci (red) following exposure of the animal to

the odorant methyl benzoate. The labeled foci correspond

to numerous glomeruli at different locations in the olfactory

bulb. (Reproduced, with permission, from Johnson, Farahbod, and Leon 2005. Copyright © 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.) C. The olfactory bulb has a precise map of odorant receptor inputs because each glomerulus is dedicated to only one type of receptor. The maps in the two olfactory bulbs are bilaterally

symmetrical and are nearly identical across individuals. The maps on the medial and lateral sides of each bulb are similar, but slightly displaced along the dorsal-ventral and anteriorposterior axes.

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

Olfactory

bulb Vomeronasal organ Accessory olfactory Lateral

<!-- image -->

through the lateral olfactory tract to the olfactory cortex. The olfac-

tory cortex consists of a number of distinct areas, the largest of which is the piriform cortex. From these areas, olfactory information is transmitted to other brain areas directly as well as indirectly to form excitatory glutamatergic synapses with pyrami-

dal neurons, the projection neurons of the cortex.

Pyramidal neuron activity appears to be modulated by

inhibitory inputs from local GABAergic interneurons as well as by excitatory inputs from other pyramidal neurons in the same and other olfactory cortical areas and the contralateral piriform cortex. The piriform cortex also receives centrifugal inputs from modulatory brain areas, suggesting that its activity may be adjusted according to physiological or behavioral state. Finally, the olfactory cortex projects to the olfactory bulb, providing yet another possible means of signal modulation. As with the olfactory bulb relay neurons, individual pyramidal neurons can be activated by more than one odorant. However, the pyramidal neurons

activated by a particular odorant are scattered across the piriform cortex, an arrangement different from that of the olfactory bulb. Mitral cells in different parts of the olfactory bulb can project axons to the same subregion of the piriform cortex, further indicating that the highly organized map of odorant receptor inputs in the olfactory bulb is not recapitulated in the cortex.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 690

Entorhinal

cortex

Hippocampus

crimination, and the amygdala and hypothalamus, which may be

involved in emotional and physiological responses to odors. Mitral cells in the accessory olfactory bulb project to specific areas of the amygdala that transmit signals to the hypothalamus. Output From the Olfactory Cortex Reaches Higher

Cortical and Limbic Areas

## Pyramidal neurons in the olfactory cortex transmit information indirectly to the orbitofrontal cortex

through the thalamus and directly to the frontal cortex.

These pathways to higher cortical areas are thought to be important in odor discrimination. In fact, people with lesions of the orbitofrontal cortex are unable to discriminate odors. Interestingly, recordings in the orbitofrontal cortex suggest that some individual neurons in that area receive multimodal input, responding, for example, to the smell, sight, or taste of a banana. Many areas of the olfactory cortex also relay information to nonolfactory areas of the amygdala, which is linked to emotions, and to the hypothala-

mus, which controls basic drives, such as appetite, as well as a number of innate behaviors. These limbic areas are thought to play a role in the emotional and motivational aspects of smell as well as many of the behavioral and physiological effects of odorants. In animals, they may be important in the generation of

12/12/20 3:20 PM

stereotyped behavioral and physiological responses to

odors of predators or to pheromones that are detected

in the olfactory epithelium.

Olfactory Acuity Varies in Humans

Olfactory acuity can vary as much as 1,000-fold among

## humans, even among people with no obvious abnor-

mality. The most common olfactory aberration is specific

anosmia. An individual with a specific anosmia has lowered sensitivity to a specific odorant even though sensitivity to other odorants appears normal. Specific anosmias to some odorants are common, with a few occurring in 1% to 20% of people. For example, 12% of individuals tested in one study exhibited a specific anosmia for musk. Recent studies indicate that specific anosmias can be caused by mutations in particular odorant receptor genes. Far rarer abnormalities of olfaction, such as general anosmia (complete lack of olfactory sensation) or hyposmia (diminished sense of smell), are often transient and can

derive from respiratory infections. Chronic anosmia or hyposmia can result from damage to the olfactory epithelium caused by infections; from particular diseases, such as Parkinson disease; or from head trauma that severs the olfactory nerves passing through holes in the cribriform plate, which then become blocked by scar tissue. Olfactory hallucinations of repugnant smells (cacosmia) can occur as a consequence of epileptic seizures. Odors Elicit Characteristic Innate Behaviors

Pheromones Are Detected in Two

## Olfactory Structures

## In many animals, the olfactory system detects not only odors but also pheromones, chemicals that are

released from animals and influence the behavior or

physiology of members of the same species. Pheromones play important roles in a variety of mammals, although they have not been demonstrated in humans. Often contained in urine or glandular secretions, some pheromones modulate the levels of reproductive hormones or stimulate sexual behavior or aggression. Pheromones are detected by two separate structures: the nasal olfactory epithelium, where odorants are detected, and the vomeronasal organ, an accessory olfactory organ thought to be specialized for the detection of pheromones and other animal cues. The vomeronasal organ is present in many mammals, although not in humans. It is a tubular structure in the nasal septum that has a duct opening into the

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 691

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


nasal cavity and one inner wall lined by a sensory

epithelium. Signals generated by sensory neurons

in the epithelium of the vomeronasal organ follow a

distinct pathway. They travel through the accessory olfactory bulb primarily to the medial amygdala and posterior-medial cortical amygdala and from there to the hypothalamus. Sensory detection in the vomeronasal organ differs from that in the olfactory epithelium. The vomeronasal organ has two different families of chemosensory

receptors, the V1R and V2R families. In the mouse, each family has more than 100 members. Variation in amino acid sequence between members of each receptor family suggests that each family may recognize a variety of different ligands. Like odorant receptors, V1R and V2R receptors have the seven transmembrane domains typical of G protein–coupled receptors. The V2R receptor differs from both V1R and odorant receptors in having a large extracellular domain at the N-terminal end (Figure 29–9A). By analogy with receptors with similar structures, ligands may bind V1R receptors in a membrane pocket formed by a combination of transmembrane domains, whereas binding to V2R receptors may occur in the large extracellular domain. Although the V1R receptors are thought to recognize volatile chemicals, at least some V2Rs are thought to recognize proteins. These include a protein pheromone present in tears, mouse urinary proteins that stimulate aggression, and predator proteins from cats and rats that stimulate fear in mice. The V1R and V2R families are expressed in different spatial zones in the vomeronasal organ that express different G proteins (Figure 29–9B,C). Each V1R or V2R

gene is expressed in a small percentage of neurons scattered throughout one zone, an arrangement similar to that of odorant receptors in the olfactory epithelium. Similar to the main olfactory bulb, vomeronasal neurons with the same receptor type project to the same glomeruli in the accessory olfactory bulb, although the glomeruli for each receptor type are more numerous and their distribution less stereotyped than in the main olfactory bulb. In addition to V1R and V2R receptors, the vomeronasal organ has a family of five formyl peptide-related receptors (FPRs). These receptors are related to immune system FPRs that detect bacterial proteins, raising speculation that they might play a role in detecting diseased animals of the same species. Invertebrate Olfactory Systems Can Be Used to Study Odor Coding and Behavior

## Because invertebrates have simple nervous systems and often respond to olfactory stimuli with stereotyped

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

behaviors, they are useful for understanding the rela-

tionship between the neural representation of odor

and behavior.

Certain features of chemosensory systems are highly conserved in evolution. First, all metazoan animals can detect a variety of organic molecules using

specialized chemosensory neurons with cilia or microvilli that contact the external environment. Second, the initial events of odor detection are mediated by families of transmembrane receptors with specific expression patterns in peripheral sensory neurons. Other features of the olfactory system differ between species, reflecting selection pressures and evolutionary histories of the animals. The primary sensory organs of insects are the antennae and appendages known as maxillary palps near the mouth (Figure 29–10A). Whereas mammals

have millions of olfactory neurons, insects have a much smaller number. There are approximately 2,600 olfactory neurons in the fruit fly Drosophila and approximately 60,000 in the honeybee. The insect odorant receptors were discovered by finding multigene receptor families in the Drosophila genome, and these genes have now been examined in

other insect genomes as well. Remarkably, they have little similarity to mammalian odorant receptors save for the presence of many transmembrane domains. Indeed, insect receptors appear to have an independent evolutionary origin from mammalian receptors and may not even be G protein–coupled receptors— an extreme example of the fast evolutionary change observed across all olfactory receptor systems. In Drosophila, the main odorant receptor family has only 60 genes, rather than the hundreds characteristic of vertebrates. The malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae and the honeybee have similar numbers (85–95 genes), whereas leaf-cutter ants have more than 350 odorant Vomeronasal organ

<!-- image -->

Figure 29–9 (Right) Candidate pheromone receptors in the

vomeronasal organ.

<!-- image -->

A. The V1R and V2R families of receptors are expressed in the

vomeronasal organ. In the mouse, each family has more than 100 members, which vary in protein sequence. Members of

both families have the seven transmembrane domains of G

protein–coupled receptors, but V2R receptors also have a large extracellular domain at the N-terminal end that may be the site of ligand binding. B. Sections through the vomeronasal organ show individual V1R and V2R probes hybridized to subsets of neurons in two distinct zones. (Reproduced, with permission, from Dulac and

Axel 1995; Matsunami and Buck 1997.) C. The two zones express high levels of different G proteins, Gα αi2 and Gα αo .

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 692

C Receptor and G protein distribution HOOC

V1R

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

V2R

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Figure 29–10 Olfactory pathways from the

antenna to the brain in Drosophila

.

A. The axons of olfactory neurons with cell bod-

ies and dendrites in the antenna and maxillary palp project axons to the antennal lobe. Projec-

tion neurons in the antennal lobe then project to two regions of the fly brain, the mushroom body and lateral protocerebrum. (Reproduced, with permission, from Takaki Komiyama and Liqun Luo.) B. The neurons that express one type of olfactory receptor gene, detected by RNA in situ hybridization, are scattered in the maxillary palp

- (1) or antenna (2 , 3). C. All neurons that express the olfactory receptor gene OR47 converge on a glomerulus in the antennal lobe. (Reproduced, with permission,

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses

A Olfactory pathways

<!-- image -->

1 DOR 71

- from Vosshall et al. 1999; Vosshall, Wong, and Axel 2000.) D. Each odorant elicits a physiological response from a subset of glomeruli in the antennal lobe. Two-photon calcium imaging was used to detect
- odor-evoked signals. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wang et al. 2003. Copyright © 2003 Elsevier.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

receptor genes, suggesting a wide variation in receptor

number in insects.

Despite molecular differences in receptors, the

anatomical organization of the fly's olfactory system is quite similar to that of vertebrates. Each olfactory

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 693

2 DOR 87

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


Lateral

protocerebrum

Mushroom

body

3 DOR 67

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

neuron expresses one or sometimes two functional

odorant receptor genes. The neurons expressing a

particular gene are loosely localized to a region of the

antenna but interspersed with neurons expressing other genes (Figure 29–10B). This scattered distribution is

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

not the case at the next level of organization, the anten-

nal lobe. Axons from sensory neurons that express one

type of receptor converge on two invariant glomeruli

in the antennal lobe, one each on the left and right sides of the animal (Figure 29–10C). This organization is strikingly similar to that of the first sensory relay in the vertebrate olfactory bulb and is also found in the moth, honeybee, and other insects. Because there are only a few dozen receptor genes in Drosophila, it is possible to characterize the entire repertory of odorant-receptor interactions, a goal that is not

yet attainable in mammals. Sophisticated genetic methods can be used to label and record from a Drosophila neuron expressing a single known odorant receptor gene. By repeating this experiment with many receptors and odors, the receptive fields of the odorant receptors have been defined and shown to be quite diverse. In insects, individual odorant receptors can detect large numbers of odorants, including odorants with very different chemical structures. This broad recogni- The projection neurons from the antennal lobe extend to higher brain centers called mushroom bod- ies and lateral protocerebrum (Figure 29–10A). These structures may represent insect equivalents of the olfactory cortex. The mushroom bodies are sites of olfactory associative learning and multimodal associative learning; the lateral protocerebrum is important for innate olfactory responses. At this stage, projection neurons form complex connections with a large number of downstream neurons. Neurons in higher brain centers in Drosophila have the potential to integrate information from many receptors. Olfactory Cues Elicit Stereotyped Behaviors and Physiological Responses in the Nematode

## The nematode roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans has one of the simplest nervous systems in the animal kingdom, with only 302 neurons in the entire ani-

-mal. Of these, 32 are ciliated chemosensory neurons. Because C. elegans has strong behavioral responses to a wide variety of chemicals, it has been a useful experimental animal for relating olfactory signals to behavior. Each chemosensory neuron detects a specific set of chemicals, and activation of the neuron is required for the behavioral responses to those substances. The neuron for a particular response, such as attraction to a specific odor, occurs in the same position in all individuals. The molecular mechanisms of olfaction in C. elegans were elucidated through genetic screens for mutant worms lacking the ability to detect odors (anosmia).

tion of odorants by "generalist" receptors is necessary if only a small number of receptors is available to detect all biologically significant odorants. A single insect receptor protein that detects many odors can be stimulated by some odors and inhibited by others, often with distinct temporal patterns. A subset of insect odorant receptors that convey information about pheromones or other unusual odors like carbon dioxide are more selective. Thus, the coding potential of each olfactory neuron can be broad or narrow and arises from a com bination of stimulatory and inhibitory signals delivered to its receptors. Information from the olfactory neurons is relayed to the antennal lobe where sensory neurons expressing the same odorant receptor converge onto a small

number of projection neurons in one glomerulus (Figure 29–10A). Because Drosophila glomeruli are stereotyped in position and have one type of odorant receptor input, the transformation of information across the synapse can be described. Convergence of many olfactory sensory axons onto a few projection neurons leads to a great increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of olfactory signals, so projection neurons are much more sensitive to odor than individual olfactory neurons. Within the antennal lobe, excitatory interneurons distribute signals to projection neurons at distal locations, and inhibitory interneurons feed back onto the olfactory sensory neurons to dampen their input. Thus, while activity of an individual olfactory neuron is conveyed to one glomerulus. its activity is also distributed across the entire antennal lobe, as it is processed by excitatory and inhibitory local interneurons that connect many glomeruli.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 694

The G protein–coupled receptor for the volatile odorant diacetyl emerged from these screens (Figure 29–11). This receptor is one of approximately 1,700 predicted G protein–coupled chemoreceptor genes in C. elegans , the largest number of chemoreceptors among known genomes. Other kinds of chemosensory receptors are also present; for example, C. elegans senses external oxygen levels indirectly by detecting soluble guanylate cyclases that bind directly to oxygen. With so many chemoreceptors, nematodes are able to recognize a large variety of odors with great sensitivity. Some chemosensory neurons use G proteins to regulate cyclic guanosine 3 ′ ,5 ′ -monophosphate (cGMP) and a cGMPgated channel, a signal transduction pathway like that of vertebrate photoreceptors. Other chemosensory neurons signal through a transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRPV) channel, like vertebrate nociceptive neurons. The "one neuron, one receptor" principle observed in vertebrates and insects does not operate in nematodes because the number of neurons is much smaller

12/12/20 3:20 PM
Part IV / Perception

not the case at the next level of organization, the anten-

nal lobe. Axons from sensory neurons that express one

type of receptor converge on two invariant glomeruli

in the antennal lobe, one each on the left and right sides of the animal (Figure 29–10C). This organization is strikingly similar to that of the first sensory relay in the vertebrate olfactory bulb and is also found in the moth, honeybee, and other insects. Because there are only a few dozen receptor genes in Drosophila, it is possible to characterize the entire repertory of odorant-receptor interactions, a goal that is not

yet attainable in mammals. Sophisticated genetic methods can be used to label and record from a Drosophila neuron expressing a single known odorant receptor gene. By repeating this experiment with many receptors and odors, the receptive fields of the odorant receptors have been defined and shown to be quite diverse. In insects, individual odorant receptors can detect large numbers of odorants, including odorants with very different chemical structures. This broad recogni- The projection neurons from the antennal lobe extend to higher brain centers called mushroom bod- ies and lateral protocerebrum (Figure 29–10A). These structures may represent insect equivalents of the olfactory cortex. The mushroom bodies are sites of olfactory associative learning and multimodal associative learning; the lateral protocerebrum is important for innate olfactory responses. At this stage, projection neurons form complex connections with a large number of downstream neurons. Neurons in higher brain centers in Drosophila have the potential to integrate information from many receptors. Olfactory Cues Elicit Stereotyped Behaviors and Physiological Responses in the Nematode

## The nematode roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans has one of the simplest nervous systems in the animal kingdom, with only 302 neurons in the entire ani-

-mal. Of these, 32 are ciliated chemosensory neurons. Because C. elegans has strong behavioral responses to a wide variety of chemicals, it has been a useful experimental animal for relating olfactory signals to behavior. Each chemosensory neuron detects a specific set of chemicals, and activation of the neuron is required for the behavioral responses to those substances. The neuron for a particular response, such as attraction to a specific odor, occurs in the same position in all individuals. The molecular mechanisms of olfaction in C. elegans were elucidated through genetic screens for mutant worms lacking the ability to detect odors (anosmia).

tion of odorants by "generalist" receptors is necessary if only a small number of receptors is available to detect all biologically significant odorants. A single insect receptor protein that detects many odors can be stimulated by some odors and inhibited by others, often with distinct temporal patterns. A subset of insect odorant receptors that convey information about pheromones or other unusual odors like carbon dioxide are more selective. Thus, the coding potential of each olfactory neuron can be broad or narrow and arises from a com bination of stimulatory and inhibitory signals delivered to its receptors. Information from the olfactory neurons is relayed to the antennal lobe where sensory neurons expressing the same odorant receptor converge onto a small

number of projection neurons in one glomerulus (Figure 29–10A). Because Drosophila glomeruli are stereotyped in position and have one type of odorant receptor input, the transformation of information across the synapse can be described. Convergence of many olfactory sensory axons onto a few projection neurons leads to a great increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of olfactory signals, so projection neurons are much more sensitive to odor than individual olfactory neurons. Within the antennal lobe, excitatory interneurons distribute signals to projection neurons at distal locations, and inhibitory interneurons feed back onto the olfactory sensory neurons to dampen their input. Thus, while activity of an individual olfactory neuron is conveyed to one glomerulus. its activity is also distributed across the entire antennal lobe, as it is processed by excitatory and inhibitory local interneurons that connect many glomeruli.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 694

The G protein–coupled receptor for the volatile odorant diacetyl emerged from these screens (Figure 29–11). This receptor is one of approximately 1,700 predicted G protein–coupled chemoreceptor genes in C. elegans , the largest number of chemoreceptors among known genomes. Other kinds of chemosensory receptors are also present; for example, C. elegans senses external oxygen levels indirectly by detecting soluble guanylate cyclases that bind directly to oxygen. With so many chemoreceptors, nematodes are able to recognize a large variety of odors with great sensitivity. Some chemosensory neurons use G proteins to regulate cyclic guanosine 3 ′ ,5 ′ -monophosphate (cGMP) and a cGMPgated channel, a signal transduction pathway like that of vertebrate photoreceptors. Other chemosensory neurons signal through a transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRPV) channel, like vertebrate nociceptive neurons. The "one neuron, one receptor" principle observed in vertebrates and insects does not operate in nematodes because the number of neurons is much smaller

12/12/20 3:20 PM

A

Diacetyl Cell body of AWA neuron

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

A. A lateral view of the worm's anterior end shows the cell

body and processes of the AWA chemosensory neuron. A dendrite terminates in cilia that are exposed to environmental

chemicals. The neuron detects the volatile chemical diacetyl; animals with a mutation in the odr-10 gene are unable to sense diacetyl. B. The odr-10 gene is active only in the AWA neurons. The micrograph here shows the gene product marked with fusion to a fluorescent reporter protein; the arrow indicates the neu-

ron's axon. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sarafi-Reinach and Sengupta 2000.) than the number of receptors. Each chemoreceptor gene

is typically expressed in only one pair of chemosensory

neurons, but each neuron expresses many receptor

genes. The small size of the C. elegans nervous system limits olfactory computations. For example, a single neuron responds to many odors, but odors can be distinguished efficiently only if they are sensed by different primary sensory neurons. The relationship between odor detection and behavior has been explored in C. elegans through genetic manipulations. For example, diacetyl is nor-

mally attractive to worms, but when the diacetyl receptor is experimentally expressed in an olfactory neuron that normally senses repellents, the animals are instead repelled by diacetyl. This observation indicates that specific sensory neurons encode the hardwired behavioral responses of attraction or repulsion and that a "labeled line" connects specific odors to specific behaviors. Similar ideas have emerged from genetic manipulations of taste systems in mice and flies, where sweet and bitter preference pathways are encoded by different sets of sensory cells.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 695

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


Olfactory cues are linked to physiological

responses as well as behavioral responses in nema-

todes. Food and pheromone cues that regulate devel-

opment are detected by specific sensory neurons through G protein–coupled receptors. With low pheromone levels and plentiful food, animals rapidly develop to adulthood, whereas with high pheromone levels and scarce food, animals arrest in a long-lived larval stage called dauer larvae (Figure 29–12). Activation of these sensory neurons ultimately regulates the activity of an insulin signaling pathway that controls physiology and growth as well as the life span of the nematode. It is an open question whether the chemosensory systems and physiological systems of other animals are as entangled as they are in nematodes. Strategies for Olfaction Have Evolved Rapidly

Why have independent families of odorant receptors

## evolved in mammals, nematodes, and insects? And why have the families changed so rapidly compared

to genes involved in other important biological processes? The answer lies in a fundamental difference between olfaction and other senses such as vision, touch, and hearing. Most senses are designed to detect physical entities with reliable physical properties: photons, pressure, or sound waves. By contrast, olfactory systems

are designed to detect organic molecules that are infinitely variable and do not fit into a simple continuum of properties. Moreover, the organic molecules that are detected are produced by other living organisms, which evolve far more rapidly than the world of light, pressure, and sound. An ancient olfactory system was present in the common ancestor of all animals that exist today. That ancestor lived in the ocean, where it gave rise to dif-

ferent lineages for mammals, insects, and nematodes. Those three phyla of animals came onto land hundreds of millions of years after the phyla diverged. Each phylum independently modified its olfactory system to detect airborne odors, leading to diversification of the receptors. A consideration of the natural history of dipteran and hymenopteran insects, which have evolved in the last 200 million years, helps explain the rapid diversi-

fication of the odorant receptors. These insects include honeybees that pollinate flowers, fruit flies that feed on rotting fruit, flesh flies that arrive within minutes of death, and mosquitoes that prey on living animals. The odorants important for the survival of these insects are radically different, and receptor genes tuned to those odorants have evolved accordingly.

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

Figure 29–12 Chemosensory cues

regulate the development of C. ele-

gans

.

When exposed to different chem-

osensory cues, two larvae of the same age follow different development paths. A dauer larva, which forms under stressful conditions of low food and high population density, develops into a small slender adult (left). It is a nonfeeding, nonreproducing, stress-resistant form of the worm. In con -trast, a larva in a rich environment favoring reproductive growth develops into a normal adult (right). (Reproduced, with permission, from Manuel Zimmer.)

<!-- image -->

The Gustatory System Controls the

Sense of Taste

## Taste Has Five Submodalities That Reflect Essential Dietary Requirements

## The gustatory system is a specialized chemosensory system dedicated to evaluating potential food sources. It is the only sensory system that detects sugars and

harmful compounds present in foods, and it serves as a main driver of feeding decisions. Unlike the olfactory system, which distinguishes millions of odors, the gustatory system recognizes just a few taste categories. Humans and other mammals can distinguish five basic taste qualities: sweet, bitter, salty, sour, and umami, a Japanese word meaning delicious and asso-

ciated with the "savory" taste of amino acids. This limited palate detects all essential dietary requirements of animals: A sweet taste invites consumption of energyrich foods; bitter taste warns against the ingestion of toxic, noxious chemicals; salty taste promotes a diet

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 696

100 µm

that maintains proper electrolyte balance; sour taste

signals acidic, unripened, or fermented foods; and

umami indicates protein-rich foods.

Consistent with the nutritional importance of carbohydrates and proteins, both sweet and umami tastants elicit innately pleasurable sensations in

humans and are attractants for animals in general. In contrast, bitter and sour tastants elicit innately aversive responses in humans and animals. Taste is often thought to be synonymous with flavor. However, taste refers strictly to the five qualities encoded in the gustatory system, whereas flavor,

with its rich and varied qualities, stems from the multisensory integration of inputs from the gustatory, olfactory, and somatosensory systems (eg, texture and temperature). Tastant Detection Occurs in Taste Buds

Tastants are detected by taste receptor cells clustered

## in taste buds. Although the majority of taste buds in

12/12/20 3:20 PM

humans are located on the tongue surface, some can

also be found on the palate, pharynx, epiglottis, and

upper third of the esophagus.

Taste buds on the tongue occur in structures called papillae, of which there are three types based on morphology and location. Fungiform papillae, located on the

anterior two-thirds of the tongue, are peg-like structures that are topped with taste buds. Both the foliate papillae, situated on the posterior edge of the tongue, and the circumvallate papillae, of which there are only a few in the posterior area of the tongue, are structures surrounded by grooves lined with taste buds (Figure 29–13A). In humans, each fungiform papilla contains one to five taste buds, whereas each foliate and circum vallate papilla may contain hundreds to thousands of taste buds, respectively. The taste bud is a garlic-shaped structure embedded in the epithelium. A small opening at the epithelial surface, the taste pore, is the point of contact Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


elongated cells that are thought to serve a supporting

function, as well as a small number of round cells at

the base, which are thought to serve as stem cells. Each

taste cell extends microvilli into the taste pore, allowing the cell to contact chemicals dissolved in saliva at the epithelial surface. At its basal end, the taste cell contacts the afferent fibers of gustatory sensory neurons, whose cell bodies reside in specific sensory ganglia (see Figure 29–17).

-Although taste cells are nonneural, their contacts with the gustatory sensory neurons have the morphological characteristics of chemical synapses, including clustered presynaptic vesicles. Taste cells also resemble neurons in that they are electrically excitable; they have voltage-gated Na + , K + , and Ca 2+ channels and are capable of generating action potentials. Taste cells are very short-lived (days to weeks) and are continually replaced from the stem cell population. This turnover requires that newborn taste cells differentiate to detect one of the five taste qualities and connect to the terminals of appropriate gustatory sensory neurons, such that a sweet taste cell connects to sweet sensory neurons and a bitter taste cell to bitter sensory neurons.

with tastants (Figure 29–13B). Each taste bud contains approximately 100 taste receptor cells (taste cells), elongated cells that stretch from the taste pore to the basal area of the bud. The taste bud also contains other B A

Taste Saliva

<!-- image -->

A. The three types of papillae—circumvallate, foliate, and

fungiform—differ in morphology and location on the tongue and are differentially innervated by the chorda tympani and

glossopharyngeal nerves. B. Each taste bud contains 50 to 150 elongated taste receptor cells, as well as supporting cells and a small

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 697

dissolved in saliva. At its basal end, the taste cell contacts

gustatory sensory neurons that transmit stimulus signals to the brain. The scanning electron micrograph shows a taste bud in a foliate papilla in a rabbit. (Reproduced, with permission, from Royer and Kinnamon 1991. Copyright © 1991 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

Each Taste Modality Is Detected by Distinct Sensory

Receptors and Cells

## The five taste qualities are detected by sensory receptors in the microvilli of different taste cells. There are two general types of receptors: Bitter, sweet, and

umami tastants interact with G protein–coupled receptors, whereas salty and sour tastants interact directly with specific ion channels (Figure 29–14). These interactions depolarize the taste cell, leading to the generation of action potentials in the afferent gustatory fibers. Sweet Taste Receptor

Compounds that humans perceive as sweet include

sugars, artificial sweeteners such as saccharin and

aspartame, a few proteins such as monellin and thau-

matin, and several d-amino acids. All of these sweettasting compounds are detected by a heteromeric receptor composed of two members of the T1R taste receptor family, T1R2 and T1R3 (Figure 29–15). The Sour (Otop1) Salty (ENaC)

Na T1R receptors are a small family of three related G

protein–coupled receptors that participate in sweet

and umami detection.

Receptors of the TIR family have a large N-terminal extracellular domain (Figure 29–14) that serves as the main ligand-binding domain, similar to the V2R recep-

tor of vomeronasal neurons. This domain recognizes many different sugars with low-affinity binding in the millimolar range. This ensures that only high sugar concentrations of nutritive value are detected. Changing a single amino acid in this domain in mice can alter an animal's sensitivity to sweet compounds. Indeed, T1R3 was initially discovered by examining genes at the mouse saccharin preference (Sac) locus, a chromosomal region that governs sensitivity to saccharin, sucrose, and other sweet compounds. In mice, taste cells with T1R2 receptors are found mostly in palate, foliate, and circumvallate papillae; almost invariably, those cells also possess T1R3 recep-

tors (Figure 29–16A). Gene knockout experiments in mice indicate that the T1R2/T1R3 complex mediates

H

+

as bitter, sweet, or umami activate G protein–coupled receptors.

Bitter tastants are detected by T2R receptors, whereas sweet

+

<!-- image -->

cal microvilli of taste cells (see Figure 29–13B). Salty and sour

tastants directly activate ion channels, whereas tastants perceived

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 698

tastants are detected by a combination of T1R2 and T1R3, and

umami tastants by a combination of T1R1 and T1R3.

12/12/20 3:20 PM

A T1R2 + T1R3 recognizes sweet tastants Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses C T2R receptors recognize bitter tastants T2R-5

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Amino acids

Amino acids + IMP

lle
D-Ala
L-AP4

Control

with permission, from Nelson et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002

<!-- image -->

and T2R receptors expressed in a tissue culture cell line could

detect tastants. A. Cells expressing both rat T1R2 and rat T1R3 responded to a number of sweet compounds. (Reproduced, with permission, from Nelson et al. 2001.)

B. Cells expressing mouse T1R1 and mouse T1R3 responded to numerous l-amino acids (umami taste). Responses were potentiated by inosine monophosphate (IMP). (Reproduced,

- the detection of all sweet compounds except for high

concentrations of sugars, which may also be detected

by T1R3 alone.

Umami Taste Receptor

Umami is the name given to the savory taste of mon-

osodium glutamate, an amino acid widely used as a

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 699

C. Cells expressing different T2R receptors responded selec-

tively to different bitter compounds. Cells expressing mouse T2R5 responded most vigorously to cycloheximide (CYX),

whereas cells expressing mouse T2R8 responded preferentially to denatonium (DEN) and 6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil (PROP). (ATR , atropine; CON, control; PTC, phenyl thiocarbamide; SOA , sucrose octaacetate; STR, strychnine.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Chandrashekar et al. 2000.) flavor enhancer. It is believed that the pleasurable

sensation associated with umami taste encourages the

ingestion of proteins and is thus evolutionarily impor-

tant for nutrition. The receptor for umami taste is a complex of two T1R receptor subunits: T1R1, specific to the umami receptor, and T1R3, present in both sugar and umami

receptors (Figure 29–14). In mice, the T1R1/T1R3

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Response



Part IV / Perception

complex can interact with all l-amino acids (Figure

29–15B), but in humans it is preferentially activated

by glutamate. Purine nucleotides, such as inosine

5 ′ -monophosphate (IMP), are often added to monosodium glutamate to enhance its pleasurable umami taste. Interestingly, in vitro studies demonstrated that IMP potentiates the responsiveness of T1R1/T1R3 to l -amino acids, acting as a strong positive allosteric modulator of the receptor (Figure 29–15B). Taste cells with both T1R1 and T1R3 are concen trated in fungiform papillae (Figure 29–16A). Studies in genetically engineered mice in which individual Bitter Taste Receptor Bitter taste is thought to have evolved as an aversive signal of toxic molecules. Bitter taste sensation is elic- ited by a variety of compounds, including caffeine,

-nicotine, alkaloids, and denatonium, the most bittertasting chemical known (this compound is sometimes added to toxic products that are odorless and tasteless to prevent their ingestion). Bitter tastants are detected by a family of approximately 30 G protein–coupled receptors called

T1R genes have been deleted indicate that the T1R1/ T1R3 complex is solely responsible for umami taste, whereas T1R2/T1R3 is solely responsible for sweet taste. As expected, a genetic knockout of T1R1 selectively abolishes umami taste, a knockout of T1R2 specifically abolishes sweet taste, while a knockout of T1R3 eliminates both sweet and umami taste (exactly as predicted, given that it is a common subunit of both the umami and sweet taste receptors). Sweet and umami receptors differ significantly among different species. Most interestingly, different T1R subunits have been lost in some species, likely

Figure 29–16 (Right) Expression of T1R and T2R receptors on the tongue. Sections of mouse or rat tongue were hybridreflecting their evolutionary niche and diet. For example, the giant panda, which feeds almost exclusively on a bamboo diet, lacks a functional umami receptor. On the other hand, domestic cats, tigers, and cheetahs do not have a functional sweet receptor, whereas vampire bats that feed on a blood diet have mutations that have eliminated both sweet and umami functional receptors.

ized to probes that label T1R or T2R mRNAs to detect their

sites of expression in taste cells. A. The T1R3 receptor is expressed in taste cells of all three types of papillae. However, T1R1 is found mostly in fungiform papillae, whereas T1R2 is located predominantly in circumval-

late (and foliate) papillae. Overlap between sites of expression appears as yellow cells in the micrographs at the top. The T1R1T1R3 umami receptor is more frequently found in fungiform papillae, whereas the T1R2-T1R3 sweet receptor is more frequently found in circumvallate and foliate papillae. (Reproduced, with permission, from Nelson et al. 2001.) B. A taste cell that detects bitter tastants can express several variants of T2R receptors. Here, probes for T2R3 and T2R7 labeled the same taste cells in circumvallate papillae. (Repro-

- duced, with permission, from Adler et al. 2000.) C. The T1R and T2R receptors are expressed in different taste cells. Taste cells labeled by a T1R3 probe or mixed T1R probes (green) did not overlap with cells labeled by a mixture of T2R
- probes (red). (Reproduced, with permission, from Nelson et al. 2001.)

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 700

A

Fungiform Circumvallate T1R3

<!-- image -->

12/12/20 3:20 PM

T2Rs (Figure 29–14). However, different animal spe-

cies contain different numbers of bitter receptors

(varying from just a handful in the chicken genome Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


uses the epithelial sodium channel ENaC (see Figure

29–14). These specialized salt taste receptors are dis-

tinct from sweet, bitter, or umami receptors. At much

-higher salt concentrations, some bitter and sour taste cells also respond to salt, although the molecular details of detection have not been determined. There -fore, appetitive concentrations of salt drive responses via the ENaC salt taste receptor in the salt-sensing cells, whereas high salt concentrations activate the bitter and sour cells and thus trigger behavioral aversion. Sour Taste Receptor

Sour taste is associated with acidic or fermented

foods or drink. As with bitter compounds, animals

are innately averse to sour substances, suggesting that

the adaptive advantage of sour taste is avoidance of spoiled foods. Sour, like the other 4 taste qualities, is also detected by its own type of taste receptor cells (Figure 29–14). The ion channel Otopetrin-1 (Otop1), a proton-selective channel normally involved in the sensation of gravity in the vestibular system, is the soursensing ion channel in the taste system. As expected, a knockout of Otop1 in mice eliminated acid responses from sour taste receptor cells. Furthermore, mice engineered to express Otop1 in sweet taste receptor cells now have sweet cells that also respond to sour stimuli, demonstrating that this channel is sufficient to confer acid sensing. Molecular-genetic studies have demonstrated that the different taste modalities are detected by distinct subsets of taste cells. As we have seen, a combina-

tion of T1R1 and T1R3 is responsible for all umami taste, and a combination of T1R2 and T1R3 is needed for all sweet taste detection except for the detection of high concentrations of sugars, which can be mediated by T1R3 alone. The T1R1 and T1R2 receptors are expressed by separate subsets of taste cells, indicating that the detection of sweet and umami tastants is segregated. Similarly, receptors and molecular markers uniquely define bitter, low salt, and sour taste cells. A dramatic demonstration that each taste quality is detected by a different category of taste cells comes from studies of mice lacking a specific taste receptor

gene or cell type. These studies showed that the loss of one taste modality did not affect the others. For example, mice in which sweet cells have been genetically ablated do not detect sugars but still detect amino acids, bitter compounds, salts, and sour compounds. Similarly, mice engineered to lack specific taste receptors cannot detect the corresponding tastants. For instance, mice lacking selective bitter receptors are not responsive to the corresponding bitter tastants,

12/12/20 3:20 PM

to over 50 in the western clawed frog; humans have 28 T2R genes). These receptors recognize bitter compounds that have diverse chemical structures, with each T2R tuned to detect a small number of bitter com pounds (Figure 29–15C). The T2R receptors recognize chemicals with high-affinity binding in the micromolar range, allowing detection of minute quantities of harmful compounds. A single taste cell expresses many, probably most, types of T2R receptors (Figure 29–16B). This arrangement implies that information about different bitter tastants is integrated in individual taste cells. Because different bitter compounds are detected by the same cells, all these compounds elicit the same perceptual bitter taste quality. The degree of bitterness might be caused by a compound's effectiveness in activating bitter taste cells. Interestingly, genetic differences in the ability to perceive specific bitter compounds have been identified in both humans and mice. For example, humans

are either super-tasters, tasters, or taste-blind to the bitter chemical 6-n-propylthiouracil. It was by mapping variation in this trait to specific chromosomal loci, and then by searching for novel G protein–coupled receptor genes within that chromosomal interval, that the T2R receptors were first identified. In the case of 6-n-propylthiouracil detection, the gene responsible for the genetic difference has proven to be a particular T2R gene. Thus, some bitter compounds may be recognized predominantly by only one of the approximately 30 T2R receptor types. Taste cells expressing T2R receptors are found in both foliate and circumvallate papillae in mice (Figure 29–16C). A given taste cell expresses either T2R or T1R

receptors (ie, one taste cell–one receptor class), but a single taste bud can contain taste cells of all types (eg, sweet, umami, bitter). Such mixing of cells accords with the observation that a single taste bud can be activated by more than one class of tastant; for example, sweet as well as bitter. Salty Taste Receptor

Salt intake is critical to maintaining electrolyte bal-

ance. Perhaps because electrolytes must be maintained

within a stringent range, the behavioral response to

salt is concentration dependent: Low salt concentrations are appetitive, whereas high salt concentrations are aversive. How does the response to salt change based on concentration? It turns out that multiple taste cells detect salt. The essential salt taste receptor cell

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 701


Part IV / Perception

and mice lacking ENaC cannot detect the taste of salt.

These types of studies have shown that different tastes

are detected by different receptors expressed in differ-

ent classes of taste cells that drive specific behaviors. Studies in mice further indicate that it is the taste cells rather than the receptors that determine the animal's response to a tastant. The human bitter recep-

tor T2R16 recognizes a bitter tastant that mice cannot detect. When this receptor was expressed in mouse taste cells that normally express T2R bitter receptors, the ligand caused strong taste aversion. However, when that receptor was expressed in cells that express the T1R2/T1R3 sweet complex (ie, sweet cells), the bitter ligand elicited strong taste acceptance. These findings showed that innate responses of mice to different tastants (sweet and bitter in this example) operate via labeled lines that link the activation of different subsets of taste cells to different behavioral outcomes. Gustatory Information Is Relayed From the Periphery to the Gustatory Cortex

## Each taste cell is innervated at its base by the peripheral branches of the axons of primary sensory neurons

(Figure 29–13). Each sensory fiber branches many times, to one taste modality, such as bitter or sweet. These neurons are localized in segregated cortical fields or hot spots. Interestingly, using a light-activated ion channel to activate neurons in the sweet hot spot elicits innately attractive responses. In contrast, activation of the bitter hot spot evokes suppression of licking and strong aversive orofacial responses, mimicking what is often seen in response to bitter tastants. These experiments showed that direct control of primary taste cortex can evoke specific, reliable, and robust behaviors that mimic responses to natural tastants. They also illustrated that the gustatory pathway can activate innate, immediate responses to sweet and bitter chemicals. To demonstrate that these cortically triggered behaviors are innate (ie, independent of learning or experience), similar stimulation experiments were performed in mutant mice that had never tasted sweet or bitter chemicals (the mutation abolished all sweet and bitter signal transduction). Even in these animals, activation of the corresponding cortical fields triggered the expected behavioral response, thus substantiating the predetermined nature of the sense of taste. Perception of Flavor Depends on Gustatory, Olfactory, and Somatosensory Inputs

## -Much of what we think of as the flavor of foods derives from information provided by the integration of the

taste and olfactory systems. Volatile molecules released

innervating several taste cells within taste buds. The release of neurotransmitter from taste cells onto the sen sory fibers induces action potentials in the fibers and the transmission of signals to the sensory cell body. The cell bodies of gustatory sensory neurons lie in the geniculate, petrosal, and nodose ganglia. The peripheral branches of these neurons travel in cranial

nerves VII, IX, and X, while the central branches enter the brain stem, where they terminate on neurons in the gustatory area of the nucleus of the solitary tract (Figure 29–17). In most mammals, neurons in this nucleus transmit signals to the parabrachial nucleus of the pons, which in turn sends gustatory information to the ventroposterior medial nucleus of the thalamus. In primates, however, these neurons transmit gustatory information directly to the taste area of the thalamus. From the thalamus, taste information is transmit ted to the gustatory cortex, a region of the cerebral cortex located along the border between the anterior from foods or beverages in the mouth are pumped into the back of the nasal cavity ("retronasal passage") by the tongue, cheek, and throat movements that accompany chewing and swallowing. Although the olfactory epithelium of the nose clearly makes a major contribution to sensations of flavor, such sensations are localized in the mouth rather than in the nose. The somatosensory system is also thought to be involved in this localization of flavors. The coinci -dence between taste, somatosensory stimulation of

-the tongue, and the retronasal passage of odorants into the nose is assumed to cause odorants to be perceived as flavors in the mouth. Sensations of flavor also frequently have a somatosensory component that includes the texture of food as well as sensations evoked by spicy or minty foods and by carbonation. Insects Have Modality-Specific Taste Cells That Drive Innate Behaviors

## Insects have a specialized gustatory system that evaluates potential nutrients and toxins in food. Taste neu-

rons are found on the proboscis, internal mouthparts,

legs, wings, and ovipositor, allowing insects to sample

12/12/20 3:20 PM

insula and the frontal operculum (Figure 29–17). The gustatory cortex is believed to mediate the conscious perception and discrimination of taste stimuli. The taste areas of the thalamus and cortex also transmit information both directly and indirectly to the hypothalamus, which controls feeding behavior and autonomic responses. Large-scale calcium imaging revealed that some neurons in the gustatory cortex respond preferentially

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 702

Gustatory cortex

(anterior insula-

<!-- image -->

pharynx are innervated by the peripheral fibers of gustatory

sensory neurons, which travel in the glossopharyngeal, chorda the local chemical environment prior to ingestion. As

in mammals, only a few different types of taste cells

detect different tastes. In the Drosophila fly, the different Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses Nucleus of the solitary tract Gustatory tympani and vagus nerves and terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract in the brain stem. From there, taste information is relayed through the thalamus to the gustatory cortex as well as to the hypothalamus. it has approximately 60 olfactory receptor genes. Dif- ferent GRs are found in sugar cells versus bitter cells, with many GRs present in a single neuron. In addi-

-tion to GRs, other gene families participate in insect taste, including variants of ionotropic glutamate receptors and other ion channel classes. Similar to olfactory detection, the gene families involved in taste recognition differ across phyla, demonstrating that the gene families for chemical recognition have evolved independently. Highlights

1. Odor detection in the nose is mediated by a large

taste cell classes include those that sense sugars, bitter compounds, water, and pheromones. As in mammals, activation of these different taste cells drives differ ent innate behaviors; for example, activation of sugar cells drives food acceptance behavior, whereas activation of bitter cells drives food rejection. Thus, the basic organization of taste detection is remarkably similar in insects and mammals, despite divergent evolutionary histories. The taste receptors in insects are not related to vertebrate receptors. Members of the gustatory receptor (GR) gene family participate in the detection of sug-

ars and bitter compounds. The GRs are membranespanning receptors that are distantly related to the odorant receptors of the fly. The fly has approximately 70 GR genes, a surprisingly large number considering

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 703

family of odorant receptors that number approxi-

mately 350 in humans and 1,000 in mice. These

- receptors vary in protein sequence, consistent with an ability to detect structurally diverse odorants.

12/12/20 3:20 PM
Gustatory cortex

(anterior insula-

<!-- image -->

pharynx are innervated by the peripheral fibers of gustatory

sensory neurons, which travel in the glossopharyngeal, chorda the local chemical environment prior to ingestion. As

in mammals, only a few different types of taste cells

detect different tastes. In the Drosophila fly, the different Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses Nucleus of the solitary tract Gustatory tympani and vagus nerves and terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract in the brain stem. From there, taste information is relayed through the thalamus to the gustatory cortex as well as to the hypothalamus. it has approximately 60 olfactory receptor genes. Dif- ferent GRs are found in sugar cells versus bitter cells, with many GRs present in a single neuron. In addi-

-tion to GRs, other gene families participate in insect taste, including variants of ionotropic glutamate receptors and other ion channel classes. Similar to olfactory detection, the gene families involved in taste recognition differ across phyla, demonstrating that the gene families for chemical recognition have evolved independently. Highlights

1. Odor detection in the nose is mediated by a large

taste cell classes include those that sense sugars, bitter compounds, water, and pheromones. As in mammals, activation of these different taste cells drives differ ent innate behaviors; for example, activation of sugar cells drives food acceptance behavior, whereas activation of bitter cells drives food rejection. Thus, the basic organization of taste detection is remarkably similar in insects and mammals, despite divergent evolutionary histories. The taste receptors in insects are not related to vertebrate receptors. Members of the gustatory receptor (GR) gene family participate in the detection of sug-

ars and bitter compounds. The GRs are membranespanning receptors that are distantly related to the odorant receptors of the fly. The fly has approximately 70 GR genes, a surprisingly large number considering

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 703

family of odorant receptors that number approxi-

mately 350 in humans and 1,000 in mice. These

- receptors vary in protein sequence, consistent with an ability to detect structurally diverse odorants.

12/12/20 3:20 PM



2.

Part IV / Perception

Individual odorant receptors can detect multiple

odorants, and different odorants activate differ

-

ent combinations of receptors. This combinato-

- rial strategy explains how we can discriminate a multitude of odorants and how nearly identical odorants can have different scents. 3. Each olfactory sensory neuron in the nose expresses a single type of receptor. Thousands of neurons with the same receptor are dispersed in
- the olfactory epithelium and intermingled with neurons expressing other receptors. 4. In the olfactory bulb, the axons of the sensory neurons expressing the same receptor converge in a few receptor-specific glomeruli, generating
- a map of odorant receptor inputs that is similar among individuals. 5. The axons of olfactory bulb projection neurons project broadly to multiple areas of the olfactory cortex, generating a highly distributed organiza-
- tion of cortical neurons responsive to individual odorants. The olfactory cortex transmits information to many other brain areas. 6. In mice, pheromones can be detected in the nose or in the vomeronasal organ, a structure absent in humans. Signals from the nose and vomeronasal
- organ travel through different neural pathways in the brain. 7. The olfactory system of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster resembles that of mammals in many aspects. It uses a large number of diverse olfac-
- tory receptors, with one or a few olfactory receptors expressed by each olfactory sensory neuron. Moreover, neurons with the same receptor synapse in a few specific glomeruli in the antennal lobe of the brain. From there, olfactory signals are transmitted to two major brain areas involved in innate versus learned odor responses. The ease of using genetic approaches in fruit flies has enabled rapid study of mechanisms underlying odor coding and behavior. 8. The gustatory system detects five basic tastes: sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami (amino acids). Tastants that activate these taste qualities
- are detected by taste receptor cells located primarily in taste buds on the tongue and palate epithelium. The detection of the five different taste modalities is mediated by different taste receptor cells, each dedicated to one modality. 9. Sweet tastants are detected by a single type of receptor, which is composed of two subunits, T1R2 and T1R3. Umami receptors are related
- but comprise a combination of T1R1 and T1R3 subunits.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 704

10.

Bitter taste receptors constitute a family of

approximately 30 related but diverse receptors

that vary in ligand specificity. Individual taste

- receptor cells express many or all bitter receptors. 11. In contrast to sweet, umami, and bitter receptors, which are all G protein–coupled receptors, salty and sour tastes are detected by ion channels:
- ENaC for salt taste and Otopetrin-1 for sour taste . 12. Taste signals travel from taste buds through cranial nerves from gustatory sensory neurons in the geniculate, petrosal, and nodose ganglia via
- labeled lines (sweet taste receptor cells to sweet neurons, bitter taste cells to bitter neurons, etc.) . They then travel to the gustatory area of the nucleus of the solitary tract and parabrachial nucleus, and from there to the taste area of the thalamus and then the gustatory cortex. The gustatory cortex, in turn, projects to many brain areas, including those involved in motor control, feeding, hedonic value, learning, and memory. 13. The gustatory cortex contains hot spots for sweet and bitter taste, which, when directly stimulated, can elicit behavioral responses similar to those
- obtained with tastants applied to the tongue. 14. The fruit fly Drosophila also has a specialized gustatory system that evaluates potential nutrients and toxins in food. Different classes of taste cells
- sense sugars, bitter compounds, pheromones, or water. Activation of these different peripheral sensors drives different innate behaviors, such as food acceptance or rejection.

Linda Buck

Kristin Scott

Charles Zuker

Selected Reading

Bargmann CI. 2006. Comparative chemosensation from

receptors to ecology. Nature 444:295–301.

Giessel AJ, Datta SR. 2014. Olfactory maps, circuits and com-

- putations. Curr Opin Neurobiol 24:120–132. Stowers L, Kuo TH. 2015. Mammalian pheromones: emerg-
- ing properties and mechanisms of detection. Curr Opin Neurobiol 34:103–109.
- Touhara K, Vosshall LB. 2009. Sensing odorants and pheromones with chemosensory receptors. Annu Rev Physiol 71:307–332.

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Wilson DA, Sullivan RM. 2011. Cortical processing of odor

objects. Neuron 72:506–519.

Yarmolinsky DA, Zuker CS, Ryba NJ. 2009. Common

- sense about taste: from mammals to insects. Cell 139: 234–244.
- References

Adler E, Hoon MA, Mueller KL, Chandrashekar J, Ryba NJ,

Zuker CS. 2000. A novel family of mammalian taste recep-

tors. Cell 100:693–702.

- Bachmanov AA, Bosak NP, Lin C, et al. 2014. Genetics of taste receptors. Curr Pharm Des 20:2669–2683. Buck L, Axel R. 1991. A novel multigene family may encode
- odorant receptors: a molecular basis for odor recognition. Cell 65:175–187.
- Chandrashekar J, Kuhn C, Oka Y, et al. 2010. The cells and peripheral representation of sodium taste in mice. Nature 464:297–301.
- Chandrashekar J, Mueller KL, Hoon MA, et al. 2000. T2Rs function as bitter taste receptors. Cell 100:703–711. Chen X, Gabitto M, Peng Y, Ryba NJ, Zuker CS. 2011. A
- gustotopic map of taste qualities in the mammalian brain. Science 333:1262–1266.
- Dulac C, Axel R. 1995. A novel family of genes encoding putative pheromone receptors in mammals. Cell 83:195–206. Dulac C, Torello AT. 2003. Molecular detection of pheromone
- signals in mammals: from genes to behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:551–562.
- Glusman G, Yanai I, Rubin I, Lancet D. 2001. The complete human olfactory subgenome. Genome Res 1:685–702. Godfrey PA, Malnic B, Buck LB. 2004. The mouse olfac-
- tory receptor gene family. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:2156–2161.
- Greer PL, Bear DM, Lassance JM, et al. 2016. A family of non-GPCR chemosensors defines an alternative logic for mammalian olfaction. Cell 165:1734–1748.
- Hallem EA, Carlson JR. 2006. Coding of odors by a receptor repertoire. Cell 125:143–160. Herrada G, Dulac C. 1997. A novel family of putative pher-
- omone receptors in mammals with a topographically organized and sexually dimorphic distribution. Cell
- 90:763–773. Hoon MA, Adler E, Lindemeier J, Battey JF, Ryba NJ, Zuker CS. 1999. Putative mammalian taste receptors: a class of taste-specific GPCRs with distinct topographic selectivity.
- Cell 96:541–551. Johnson BA, Farahbod H, Leon M. 2005. Interactions between odorant functional group and hydrocarbon structure influence activity in glomerular response modules in the
- rat olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 483:205–216. Keller A, Zhuang H, Chi Q, Vosshall LB, Matsunami H. 2007. Genetic variation in a human odorant receptor alters odour perception. Nature 449:468–472.
- Kondoh K, Lu Z, Ye X, Olson DP, Lowell BB, Buck LB. 2016. A specific area of olfactory cortex involved in stress hormone responses to predator odours. Nature 532:103–106.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 705

Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


Liberles SD, Buck LB. 2006. A second class of chemosensory

receptors in the olfactory epithelium. Nature 442:645–650.

Liberles SD, Horowitz LF, Kuang D, et al. 2009. Formyl

- peptide receptors are candidate chemosensory receptors in the vomeronasal organ. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 106:9842–9847. Malnic B, Godfrey PA, Buck LB. 2004. The human olfactory receptor gene family. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:2584–2589.
- Malnic B, Hirono J, Sato T, Buck LB. 1999. Combinatorial receptor codes for odors. Cell 96:713–723. Matsunami H, Buck LB. 1997. A multigene family encoding
- a diverse array of putative pheromone receptors in mammals. Cell 90:775–784.
- Matsunami H, Montmayeur JP, Buck LB. 2000. A family of candidate taste receptors in human and mouse. Nature 404:601–604.
- Mombaerts P, Wang F, Dulac C, et al. 1996. Visualizing an olfactory sensory map. Cell 87:675–686. Montmayeur JP, Liberles SD, Matsunami H, Buck LB. 2001. A
- candidate taste receptor gene near a sweet taste locus. Nat Neurosci 4:492–498.
- Morrison E, Constanzo R. 1990. Morphology of the human olfactory epithelium. J Comp Neurol 297:1–13. Mueller KL, Hoon MA, Erlenbach I, Chandrashekar J, Zuker
- CS, Ryba NJ. 2005. The receptors and coding logic for bitter taste. Nature 434:225–229.
- Nelson G, Chandrashekar J, Hoon MA, et al. 2002. An aminoacid taste receptor. Nature 416:199–202. Nelson G, Hoon MA, Chandrashekar J, et al. 2001. Mamma-
- lian sweet taste receptors. Cell 106:381–390. Neville KR, Haberly LB. 2004. The olfactory cortex. In: GM
- Shepherd (ed). The Synaptic Organization of the Brain, pp. 415–454. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Niimura Y, Nei M. 2005. Evolutionary changes of the number of olfactory receptor genes in the human and mouse lineages. Gene 14:23–28.
- Northcutt RG. 2004. Taste buds: development and evolution. Brain Behav Evol 64:198–206. Oka Y, Butnaru M, von Buchholtz L, Ryba NJ, Zuker CS.
2013. High salt recruits aversive taste pathways. Nature 494:472–475.
- Peng Y, Gillis-Smith S, Jin H, Tränkner D, Ryba NJ, Zuker CS. 2015. Sweet and bitter taste in the brain of awake behav -ing animals. Nature 527:512–515.
- Ressler KJ, Sullivan SL, Buck LB. 1993. A zonal organization of odorant receptor gene expression in the olfactory epithelium. Cell 73:597–609.
- Ressler KJ, Sullivan SL, Buck LB. 1994. Information coding in the olfactory system: evidence for a stereotyped and highly organized epitope map in the olfactory bulb. Cell
- 79:1245–1255. Riviere S, Challet L, Fluegge D, Spehr M, Rodriguez I. 2009. Formyl peptide receptor-like proteins are a novel family of vomeronasal chemosensors. Nature 459:574–577.
- Root CM, Denny CA, Hen R, Axel R. 2014. The participation of cortical amygdala in innate, odour-driven behaviour. Nature 515:269–273.

12/12/20 3:20 PM


Part IV / Perception

Royer SM, Kinnamon JC. 1991. HVEM Serial-section analysis

of rabbit foliate taste buds. I. Type III cells and their syn-

apses. J Comp Neurol 306:49–72.

- Sarafi-Reinach TR, Sengupta P. 2000. The forkhead domain gene unc-130 generates chemosensory neuron diversity in C. elegans. Genes Dev 14:2472–2485.
- Shepherd GM, Chen WR, Greer CA. 2004. The olfactory bulb. In: GM Shepherd (ed). The Synaptic Organization of the Brain, 5th ed., pp. 164–216. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Shepherd GM, Greer CA. 1998. The olfactory bulb. In: GM Shepherd (ed). The Synaptic Organization of the Brain, 4th ed., pp. 159–203. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Stettler DD, Axel R. 2009. Representations of odor in the piriform cortex. Neuron 63:854–864. Sullivan SL, Adamson MC, Ressler KJ, Kozak CA, Buck
- LB. 1996. The chromosomal distribution of mouse odorant receptor genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:
- 884–888. Teng B, Wilson CE, Tu YH, Joshi NR, Kinnamon SC, Liman ER. 2019. Cellular and neural responses to sour stimuli require the proton channel Otop1. Curr Biol 4:3647–3656.
- Troemel ER, Kimmel BE, Bargmann CI. 1997. Reprogramming chemotaxis responses: sensory neurons define olfactory preferences in C. elegans. Cell 91:161–169.

Kandel-Ch29\_0682-0706.indd 706

Vassar R, Ngai J, Axel R. 1993. Spatial segregation of odorant

receptor expression in the mammalian olfactory epithe-

lium. Cell 74:309–318.

- Vosshall L, Amrein H, Morozov PS, Rzhetsky A, Axel R. 1999. A spatial map of olfactory receptor expression in the Drosophila antenna. Cell 96:725–736.
- Vosshall LB, Stocker RF. 2007. Molecular architecture of smell and taste in Drosophila. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:505–533. Vosshall LB, Wong AM, Axel R. 2000. An olfactory sensory
- map in the fly brain. Cell 102:147–159. Wang JW, Wong AM, Flores J, Vosshall LB, Axel R. 2003. Two-
- photon calcium imaging reveals an odor-evoked map of activity in the fly brain. Cell 112:271–282.
- Wilson RI. 2013. Early olfactory processing in Drosophila: mechanisms and principles. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:217–241. Zhang X, Firestein S. 2002. The olfactory receptor gene super-
- family of the mouse. Nat Neurosci 5:124–133. Zhang Y, Hoon MA, Chandrashekar J, et al. 2003. Coding of
- sweet, bitter, and umami tastes: different receptor cells sharing similar signaling pathways. Cell 112:293–301.
- Zhang J, Jin H, Zhang W, et al. 2019. Sour Sensing from the Togue to the Brain. Cell 179:392–402. Zhao GQ, Zhang Y, Hoon MA, et al. 2003. The receptors for
- mammalian sweet and umami taste. Cell 115:255–266.

12/12/20 3:20 PM

Part V

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 707

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 708

Preceding Page

Fresco of dancing Peucetian women from the Tomb of the Dancers in the Corso

Cotugno necropolis of Ruvo di Puglia, 4th–5th century BC. The tomb has a semicham-

ber design. Its six painted panels depict 30 dancing women, moving from left to right

with arms interlocked as though they were dancing in a circle around the interior of the

tomb. The skeletal remains of the deceased in the tomb clearly belonged to a distinguished male warrior. The tomb is named after the dancing women that appear on the frescoes in the tomb. The panels with the frescoes are now exhibited in the Naples National Archaeological Museum, inv. 9353. (Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Tomb\_of\_the\_Dancers.)

18/01/21 6:00 PM


Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 709

Movement

T

he capacity for movement, as many dictionaries remind us,

is a defining feature of animal life. As Sherrington, who pio-

neered the study of the motor system pointed out, "to move

things is all that mankind can do, for such the sole executant is muscle, whether in whispering a syllable or in felling a forest." * The immense repertoire of motions that humans are capable of stems from the activity of some 640 skeletal muscles—all under the control of the central nervous system. After processing sensory

information about the body and its surroundings, the motor centers of the brain and spinal cord issue neural commands that effect coordinated, purposeful movements. The task of the motor systems is the reverse of the task of the sensory systems. Sensory processing generates an internal representation in the brain of the outside world or of the state of the body.

Motor processing begins with an internal representation: the desired purpose of movement. Critically, however, this internal representation needs to be continuously updated by internally generated information (efference copy) and external sensory information to maintain accuracy as the movement unfolds. Just as psychophysical analysis of sensory processing tells us about the capabilities and limitations of the sensory systems, psychophysical analyses of motor performance reveal the control rules

used by the motor system. Because many of the motor acts of daily life are unconscious, we are often unaware of their complexity. Simply standing upright, for example, requires continual adjustments of numerous postural

muscles in response to the vestibular signals evoked by miniscule swaying. Walking, running, and other forms of locomotion involve the combined action of central pattern generators, gated sensory information, and descending commands, which together generate the complex patterns of alternating excitation and inhibition to the appropriate sets of muscles. Many actions, such as serving a tennis

*

Sherrington CS. 1979. 1924 Linacre lecture. In: JC Eccles, WC Gibson (eds). Sherrington: His Life

and Thought, p. 59. New York: Springer-Verlag.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 710

ball or executing an arpeggio on a piano, occur far too quickly to be

shaped by sensory feedback. Instead, centers, such as the cerebel-

lum, make use of predictive models that simulate the consequences

of the outgoing commands and allow very short latency corrections. Motor learning provides one of the most fruitful subjects for studies of neural plasticity. Motor systems are organized in a functional hierarchy, with each level concerned with a different decision. The highest and most abstract level, likely requiring the prefrontal cortex, deals with the

purpose of a movement or series of motor actions. The next level, which is concerned with the formation of a motor plan, involves interactions between the posterior parietal and premotor areas of the cerebral cortex. The premotor cortex specifies the spatiotemporal characteristics of a movement based on sensory information from the posterior parietal cortex about the environment and about the position of the body in space. The lowest level of the hierarchy coordinates the spatiotemporal details of the muscle contractions needed to execute the planned movement. This coordination is executed by the primary motor cortex, brain stem, and spinal cord. This serial view has heuristic value, but evidence suggests that many of these processes can occur in parallel. Some functions of the motor systems and their disturbance by disease have now been described at the level of the biochemistry of specific transmitter systems. In fact, the discovery that neurons in

the basal ganglia of parkinsonian patients are deficient in dopamine was the first important clue that neurological disorders in the central nervous system can result from altered chemical transmission. Neurophysiological studies have provided information as to how such transmitters play a critical role in action selection and the reinforcement of successful movements. Understanding the functional properties of the motor system is not only fundamental in its own right, but it is of further importance in helping us to understand disorders of this system and explore the

possibilities for treatment and recovery. As would be expected for such a complex apparatus, the motor system is subject to various malfunctions. Disruptions at different levels in the motor hierarchy produce distinctive symptoms, including the movement-slowing characteristic of disorders of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson disease, the incoordination seen with cerebellar disease, and the spasticity and weakness typical of spinal cord damage. For this reason, the neurological examination of a patient inevitably includes tests of reflexes, gait, and dexterity, all of which provide information about the status of the nervous system. In addition to pharmacological therapies, the treatment of motor system disorders has been augmented by two new approaches. First, focal stimulation of the basal ganglia has been shown to restore motility to certain patients with Parkinson disease; such deep-brain stimulation is also being tested in the context of other neurological and psychiatric conditions. And

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 711

second, the motor systems have become a target for the application

of neural prosthetics; neural signals are decoded and used to drive

devices that aid patients with paralysis caused by spinal cord injury

and stroke. Part Editors: Daniel M. Wolpert and Thomas M. Jessell

Part V

Chapter 30

Principles of Sensorimotor Control

| Chapter 31  The Motor Unit and Muscle Action  Chapter 32  Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord  Chapter 33  Locomotion  Chapter 34  Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices  Chapter 35  The Control of Gaze  Chapter 36  Posture  Chapter 37  The Cerebellum  Chapter 38  The Basal Ganglia  Chapter 39  Brain–Machine Interfaces   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 712


18/01/21 6:00 PM
Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 712


18/01/21 6:00 PM


Principles of Sensorimotor Control

The Control of Movement Poses Challenges for the

Nervous System

Actions Can Be Controlled Voluntarily, Rhythmically,

## or Reflexively Motor Commands Arise Through a Hierarchy of

## Sensorimotor Processes Motor Signals Are Subject to Feedforward and

## Feedback Control Feedforward Control Is Required for Rapid Movements

## Feedback Control Uses Sensory Signals to Correct Movements

Estimation of the Body's Current State Relies on Sensory

and Motor Signals Prediction Can Compensate for Sensorimotor Delays

Sensory Processing Can Differ for Action and Perception

Motor Plans Translate Tasks Into Purposeful Movement Stereotypical Patterns Are Employed in Many Movements

## Motor Planning Can Be Optimal at Reducing Costs

Optimal Feedback Control Corrects for Errors in a TaskDependent Manner

Multiple Processes Contribute to Motor Learning

Error-Based Learning Involves Adapting Internal Sensorimotor Models

## Skill Learning Relies on Multiple Processes for Success

Sensorimotor Representations Constrain Learning

Highlights

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 713

T

he preceding chapters in this book consider

how the brain constructs internal representa-

tions of the world around us. These representa-

tions are behaviorally meaningful when used to guide movement. Thus, an important function of the sensory representations is to shape the actions of the motor systems. This chapter describes the principles that govern the neural control of movement using concepts derived from behavioral studies and computational models of the brain and musculoskeletal system. We start by considering the challenges motor systems face in generating skillful actions. We then examine some of the neural mechanisms that have evolved

to meet these challenges and produce smooth, accurate, and efficient movements. Finally, we see how motor learning improves our performance and allows us to adapt to new mechanical conditions, such as when using a tool, or to learn novel correspondences between sensory and motor events, such as when using a computer mouse to control a cursor. This chapter focuses on voluntary movement; reflexes and rhythmic movements are discussed in further detail in Chapters 32 and 33. Voluntary movements are generated by neural circuits that span different levels of the sensory and motor hierarchies, including regions of the cerebral

cortex, subcortical areas such as the basal ganglia and cerebellum, and the brain stem and spinal networks. These different structures have unique patterns of neural activity. Moreover, focal damage to different structures can cause distinct motor deficits. Although it is tempting to suggest that these individual structures have distinct functions, these brain and spinal areas normally work together as a network, such that damage to one component likely affects the function of all

18/01/21 6:00 PM


Part V / Movement

others. Many of the principles discussed in this chapter

cannot be easily attributed to a single brain or spinal

area. Instead, distributed neural processing is likely to

underlie the computational mechanisms that subserve sensorimotor control. The Control of Movement Poses Challenges for

the Nervous System

## Motor systems produce neural commands that act on the muscles, causing them to contract and generate

movement. The ease with which we move, from tying

our shoelaces to returning a tennis serve, masks the complexity of the control processes involved. Many factors inherent in sensorimotor control are responsible for this complexity, which becomes clearly evident when we try to build machines to perform human-like movement (Chapter 39). Although computers can now beat the world's best players at chess and Go, no robot can manipulate a chess piece with the dexterity of a 6-year-old child. The act of returning a tennis serve illustrates why the control of movement is challenging for the brain (Figure 30–1). First, motor systems have to contend

with different forms of uncertainty, such as our incomplete knowledge with regard to the state of the world and the rewards we might gain. On the sensory side, although the player may see the serve, she cannot be certain where her opponent will aim or where the ball might strike the racket. On the motor side, there is

Time delays

sensory and motor uncertainty as to the likely success of different possible returns. Skilled performance requires reducing uncer- tainty by anticipating events we may encounter (the trajectory of an opponent's tennis serve) and by motor planning (adopting an appropriate stance to return the expected serve). Second, even if the player can reliably estimate the ball's trajectory, she must determine from sensory signals which of the 600 muscles she will use in order to move her body and racket to intercept the ball. Controlling such a system can be challenging as it is hard to explore all possible actions effectively in a system with many degrees of freedom (eg, a large number of individual muscles), making learning difficult. We will see how the motor system reduces the degrees of freedom of the musculoskeletal system by controlling groups of muscles, termed synergies, to simplify control. Third, unwanted disturbances, termed noise, corrupt many signals and are present at all stages of sensorimotor control, from sensory processing, through Multiple degrees of freedom planning, to the outputs of the motor system. For example, in a tennis serve, such noise will cause the ball to land in different places even when the server is trying to hit the same location on the court. Both sensory feedback, reflecting the ball's location, and motor outputs are contaminated with noise. The variability inherent in such noise limits our ability to perceive accurately and act precisely. The amount of noise in our motor commands tends to increase with stronger commands (ie, more force). This limits our ability to move rapidly and accurately at the same time and thus Around

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 714

200 joints

and 600

muscles

to control

Complex dynamics

eg, raising arm causes

postural instability

18/01/21 6:00 PM

leads to a trade-off between speed and accuracy. We

will see how efficient planning of movement can mini-

mize the deleterious effects of noise on task success.

Fourth, time delays are present at all stages of the sensorimotor system, including the delays arising from receptor dynamics, conduction delays along nerve fib-

ers and synapses, and delays in the contraction of muscles in response to motor commands. Together, these delays, which can be on the order of 100 ms, depend on the particular sensory modality (eg, longer for vision than proprioception) and complexity of processing (eg, longer for face recognition than motion perception). Therefore, we effectively live in the past, with the control system only having access to out-of-date information about the world and our own body. Such delays can result in instability when trying to make fast movements, as we try to correct for errors we perceive but that no longer exist. We will see how the brain makes predictions of the future states of the body and environment to reduce the negative consequences of such delays. Fifth, the body and environment change both on a short and a long timescale. For example, within the relatively short period of a game, a player must correct

for weakening muscles as she fatigues and changes in the court surface when it rains. On a longer timescale, the properties of our motor system change dramatically during growth as our limbs lengthen and increase in weight. As we will see, the ever-changing properties of the motor system place a premium on our ability to use motor learning to adapt control appropriately. Finally, the relation between motor command and the ensuing action is highly complex. The motion of each body segment produces torques, and potentially

motions, at all other body segments through mechanical interactions. For example, when a player raises the racket to hit the ball, she must anticipate destabilizing forces and counteract them to maintain balance. Indeed, when we raise our arms forward while standing, the first muscle to activate is an ankle flexor ensuring you remain upright. We will see how the sensorimotor system controls movement of different segments to maintain fine coordination of actions. Actions Can Be Controlled Voluntarily,

Rhythmically, or Reflexively

## Although movements are often classified according to function—as eye movement, prehension (reach and

grasp), posture, locomotion, breathing, and speech—

many of these functions are subserved by overlapping groups of muscles. Moreover, the same groups of

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 715

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control


muscles can be controlled voluntarily, rhythmically, or

reflexively. For example, the muscles that control res-

piration can be used to take a deep breath voluntarily

before diving under water, to breathe automatically and rhythmically in a regular cycle of inspiration and expiration, or to act reflexively in response to a noxious stimulus in the throat, producing a cough. Voluntary movements are those that are under conscious control. Rhythmic movements can also be controlled voluntarily but differ from voluntary

movements in that their timing and spatial organization are to a larger extent controlled autonomously by spinal or brain stem circuitry. Reflexes are stereotyped responses to specific stimuli that are generated by neural circuits in the spinal cord or brain stem (although some reflexes involve pathways through cortex). These responses occur on a shorter timescale than voluntary responses. Although we may consciously intend to perform a task or plan a certain sequence of actions, and at times are aware of deciding to move at a particular moment,

movements generally seem to occur automatically. Conscious processes are not necessary for moment-tomoment control of movement. We carry out the most complicated movements without a thought to the actual joint motions or muscle contractions required. The tennis player does not consciously decide which muscles to use to return a serve with a backhand or which body parts must be moved to intercept the ball. In fact, thinking about each body movement before it takes place can disrupt the player's performance. Motor Commands Arise Through a Hierarchy

of Sensorimotor Processes

## Although the final output to the musculoskeletal system is via motor neurons in the spinal cord, the

motor control of muscles for a specific action occurs

through a hierarchy of control centers. This arrangement can simplify control: Higher levels can plan more global goals, whereas lower levels are concerned with how these goals are implemented. At the lowest level, muscles themselves have properties that can contribute to control even without any change in the motor command. Unlike the

electric motors of a robot, muscles have substantial passive properties that depend on both the motor command acting on the muscle as well as the muscle's length and rate of change of length (Chapter 31). As a simple approximation, a muscle can be seen as acting like a spring (increasing tension as it is stretched and reducing tension as it is shortened) and damper

18/01/21 6:00 PM


Part V / Movement

(increasing tension as the rate of stretch increases).

For small perturbations, these properties tend to act

to stabilize the length of a muscle and hence stabilize

the joint on which the muscle acts. For example, if an external perturbation extends a joint, the flexor muscles will be stretched, increasing their tension, while the extensor muscles will be shortened, reducing their tension, and the imbalance in tension will tend to bring the joint back toward its original position. A particular advantage of such control is that, unlike higher levels in the motor hierarchy, such changes in force act with minimal delay as they are simply an effect of passive physical properties of the muscles. In addition to the passive properties of muscles, sensory inputs can cause motor output directly without the intervention of higher brain centers. Sensori- movements can be generated in the absence of a stim- ulus or used to compensate for a perturbation. The time to generate a voluntary movement in response to a physical perturbation depends both on the nature of the perturbation (modality and size) as well as whether the response can be specified before the perturbation occurs. For example, a voluntary correction to a small physical perturbation can occur with a latency of about 110 ms. Although we have described clear distinctions between the different levels of the motor hierarchy, from reflexes through to voluntary control, in real-

-ity, such distinctions are blurred in a continuum of responses spanning different latencies. Increasing the response time permits additional neural circuitry to be involved in the sensorimotor loop and tends to increase the sophistication and adaptability of the response, leading to a trade-off between the speed of the response and the sophistication of processing as one ascends the motor hierarchy. Motor Signals Are Subject to Feedforward

and Feedback Control

## In this section, we will first illustrate some principles of control that are important for dealing with the problem

of sensory delays, sensory noise, and motor noise. For

-simplicity, we confine our discussion to relatively simple movements, such as moving the eyes in response to head movements or moving the hand from one location to another. We consider two broad classes of con -trol, feedforward and feedback, which differ in their reliance on sensory feedback during the movement. Feedforward Control Is Required for Rapid Movements

motor responses, such as spinal reflexes, control for local disturbance or noxious stimuli. Reflexes are ste reotyped responses to specific stimuli that are generated by simple neural circuits in the spinal cord or brain stem. For example, a spinal flexor withdrawal reflex can remove your hand from a hot stove without any descending input from the brain. The advantage of such reflexes is that they are fast; the disadvantage is they are less flexible than voluntary control systems (Chapter 32). Again, there is a hierarchy of reflex circuits. The fastest is the monosynaptic stretch reflex, which drives contraction of a stretched muscle. In this reflex circuit, sensory neurons that are activated by stretch receptors in the muscle (the muscle spindle) directly synapse onto motor neurons that cause the same muscle to contract. The time from the stimu lus to the response is around 25 ms. This reflex can be tested clinically by striking the quadriceps muscle tendon just below the patella. While this monosynaptic stretch reflex is not adaptable on short timescales, multisynaptic reflexes, which involve higher level structures such as motor cortex,

can produce responses at around 70 ms. Unlike the monosynaptic reflex, multisynaptic reflexes are adaptable to changes in behavioral goals because the circuit connecting sensory and motor neurons can be modified by task-dependent properties. The strength of a reflex tends to increase with the tension in a muscle (called gain-scaling), and therefore, reflexes can be amplified by co-contracting the set of muscles around a joint so as to respond to perturbations with a greater force. In fact, we use such co-contraction when holding the hand of a rebellious child when crossing a road. Such a strategy can amplify the reflexes, thereby reducing deviations of the arm caused by random external forces. Finally, voluntary movements are those that are under conscious control by the brain. Voluntary

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 716

## Some movements are executed without monitoring the sensory feedback that arises from the action. In such

feedforward control situations, the motor command is

generated without regard to the sensory consequences. Such commands are therefore also termed open-loop , reflecting the fact that the sensorimotor loop is not completed by sensory feedback (Figure 30–2A). Open-loop control requires some information about the body so that the appropriate command can be generated. For example, it should include informa-

tion about the dynamics of the motor system. Here, "dynamics" refers to the relation between the motor command (or the torques or forces) applied and the ensuing motion of the body, for example, joint rotations. For perfect open-loop control, one needs to

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Figure 30–2 Feedforward and feedback

control.

A. A feedforward control motor command

is based on a desired state. Any errors that arise during the movement are not

monitored. Although we illustrate the elements of feedforward control for the arm, only the initial portion of any arm movement is driven by feedforward signals and the movement typically involves feedback control. B. With feedback control, the desired and sensed states are compared (at the comparator) to generate an error signal, which A Feedforward control Desired state Desired state

<!-- image -->

helps shape the motor command. There can be considerable delay in the feedback of sensory information to the comparator.

invert the dynamics so as to calculate the motor com-

<!-- image -->

mand that will generate the desired motion. The neu-

ral mechanism that performs this inversion is called an

inverse model, a type of internal model (Box 30–1). An inverse model coupled to open-loop control can determine what motor commands are needed to produce the particular movements necessary to achieve a goal. Although not monitoring the consequences of an action may seem counterproductive, there are good reasons for not doing so. The main reason, as discussed

earlier, is that there are delays in both sensing and acting. That is, the conversion of a stimulus into neural signals by sensory receptors and conveyance of these signals to central neurons take time. For example, visual inputs can take around 60 ms to be processed in the retina and transmitted to the visual cortex. In addition to delays in afferent sensory systems, there are also delays in central processing, in the transmission of efferent signals to motor neurons, and in the response of muscles. In all, the combined sensorimotor loop delay is appreciable, approximately 120 to 150 ms for a motor response to a visual stimulus. This delay means that movements like saccades, which redirect gaze within 30 ms, cannot use sensory feedback to guide movement. Even for slower movements like reaching, which takes on the order of 500 ms, sensory information cannot be used to guide the initial part of a movement, so open-loop control must be used.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 717

Open-loop control also has disadvantages. Any

movement errors caused by inaccuracies in planning

or execution will not be corrected, and therefore will

compound themselves over time or successive movements. The more complex the system under control, the more difficult it is to arrive at an accurate inverse model through learning. An example of a purely open-loop control system is the control of the eye in response to head rotation. The vestibulo-ocular reflex (Chapter 27) uses open-

loop control to fix gaze on an object during head rotation. The vestibular labyrinth senses the head rotation and drives appropriate movements of the eyes through a three-synapse circuit. The reflex does not require (or use) vision during the movement (the eyes maintain a stable gaze when the head is rotated in the dark). Sensory information from the vestibular system does drive the eye movement, but the control is feedforward (any errors that arise are not corrected during the movement). Such precise open-loop control is possible because the dynamic properties of the eye are relatively simple, the rotation of the head can be directly sensed by the vestibular labyrinth, and the eye tends not to be substantially perturbed by external events. In contrast, it is very difficult to optimize an inverse model for a complex musculoskeletal system such as the arm, and thus, the control of arm movement requires some form of error correction.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control


Box 30–1 Internal Models

The utility of numerical models in the physical sci-

ences has a long history. Numerical models are abstract

quantitative representations of complex physical sys-

tems. Some start with equations and parameters that represent initial conditions and run forward, either in time or space, to generate physical variables at some future state. For example, we can construct a model of the weather that predicts wind speed and temperature 2 weeks from now. Other models start with a state, a set of physical variables with specific values, and run in the inverse direction to determine what parameters in the system

account for that state. When we fit a straight line to a set of data points, we are constructing an inverse model that estimates slope and intercept based on the equations of the system being linear. An inverse model thus may allow us to know how to set the parameters of the system to obtain desired outcomes. Over the past 50 years, the idea that the nervous system has similar predictive models of the physical world to guide behavior has become a major issue in neuro- make use of internal representations of the external world:

If the organism carries a "small-scale model" of external reality and of its own possible actions within its head, it is able to try

out various alternatives, conclude which is the best of them,

react to future situations before they arise, use the knowledge of past events in dealing with the present and future, and in every way to react in a much fuller, safer, and more competent manner to the emergencies that face it. In this view, an internal model allows an organism to contemplate the consequences of potential actions

without actually committing itself to those actions. In

the context of sensorimotor control, internal models can answer two fundamental questions. First, how can we generate motor commands that act on our muscles so as to control the behavior of our body? Second, how can we predict the consequences of our own motor commands? The central nervous system must exercise both control and prediction to achieve skilled motor performance. Prediction and control are two sides of the same

-, coin, and the two processes map exactly onto forward and inverse models (Figure 30–3). Prediction turns motor commands into expected sensory consequences, whereas control turns desired sensory consequences into motor commands.

science. Such a model is termed "internal" because it is instantiated in neural circuits and is therefore inter nal to the central nervous system. The idea originated in Kenneth Craik's notion of internal models for cognitive function. In his 1943 book The Nature of Explanation Craik was perhaps the first to suggest that organisms Desired Inverse model copy of the motor command is passed to a forward model that simulates the interaction of the motor system and the world and thus can predict behaviors. If both forward and

behavior

<!-- image -->

inverse model determines the motor commands that will

produce a behavioral goal, such as raising the arm while holding a ball. A descending motor command acts on the musculoskeletal system to produce the movement. A

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 718

inverse models are accurate, the output of the forward model (the predicted behavior) will be the same as the input to the inverse model (the desired behavior).

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Feedback Control Uses Sensory Signals to

Correct Movements

## To correct movement errors as they arise, movement must be monitored. Systems that perform error correction are

known as feedback or closed-loop control because the

sensorimotor loop is complete (Figure 30–2B). The simplest form of feedback control is one in which the control system generates a fixed response when the error exceeds some threshold. Such a sys-

tem is seen in most central heating systems in which a thermostat is set to a desired temperature. When the house temperature falls below the specified level, the heating is turned on until the temperature reaches that level. Although such a system is simple and can be effective, it has the drawback that the amount of heat being put into the house does not relate to the discrepancy between the actual and desired temperature (the error). A better system is one in which the control signal is proportional to the error. Such proportional control of movement involves sensing the error between the actual and desired position of, for example, the hand. The size of the correc-

tive motor command is in proportion to the size of the error and in a direction to reduce the error. The amount by which the corrective motor command is increased or decreased per unit of positional error is called the gain. By continuously correcting a movement, feedback control can be robust both to noise in the sensori motor system and to environmental perturbations. While feedback control can update commands in response to deviations that arise during the movement, it is sensitive to feedback delays. Without any Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control


head is the same in both conditions, the former is pre-

cise because it uses the vestibulo-ocular reflex, whereas

the latter uses feedback (requiring an error in velocity

to drive the eye movement) and thus is less precise, particularly as the frequency of motion increases. In most motor systems, movement control is achieved through a combination of feedforward and feedback processes. We will see later that these two

components arise naturally in a unified model of movement production. Estimation of the Body's Current State Relies on Sensory and Motor Signals

## Accurate control of movement requires information about our body's current state, for example, the positions and velocities of the different segments of the

body. To grasp an object, we need to know not only the location, shape, and surface properties of the object but also the current configuration of our arm and fingers so as to appropriately shape and position the hand. Estimating the state of the body is not a trivial problem. First, as we have seen, sensory signals are delayed due to sensory transduction and conduction

-time. Therefore, signals from our muscles, joints, and vision are all out of date by the time they reach the central nervous system. Second, the sensory signals we receive are often imprecise and corrupted by neural noise. For example, if you touch the underside of a table with the finger of one hand and try to estimate its location on the top of the table with your other hand, you can be off by a considerable distance. Third, we often do not have sensors that directly communicate relevant information. For example, although we have sensors that report muscle length and joint angle, we have no sensors within the limb that directly determine the location of the hand in space. Therefore, sophisticated computation is required to estimate current body states as accurately as possible. Several principles have emerged as to how the brain estimates state. First, state estimation relies on internal models of sensorimotor transformations. Given the fixed lengths of our limb segments, there is a mathematical relation

delay, as the gain of the feedback controller increases, the system will track a desired position with increasing fidelity (Figure 30–4). However, as feedback delay increases, the control system may start to oscillate and eventually become unstable. This is because with a delay the system may respond to errors that no longer exist and may therefore even correct in the wrong direction. Smooth pursuit eye movement, used to track a moving object, is an example of a movement driven primarily by feedback. Smooth pursuit uses feedback

to minimize the velocity error on the retina (the difference between the gaze and target velocity). We can compare the efficiency of feedforward and feedback control in minimizing error. Compare how easy it is to fixate on your outstretched stationary finger when quickly rotating your head back and forth versus trying to track your finger when it is moving it rapidly sinusoidally left and right while your head remains stationary. Although the relative motion of finger to

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 719

between the muscle lengths or joint angles of the arm and the location of the hand in space. A neural representation of this relation allows the central nervous system to estimate hand position if it knows the joint angles and segment lengths. Neural circuits that compute such sensorimotor transformations are examples of internal models (Box 30–1). Second, state estimation can be improved by combining multiple sensory modalities. For example, information about the state of our limbs arrives from

18/01/21 6:00 PM


Part V / Movement

Target

Hand

Delay = 0 ms Increasing delay Delay = 80 ms Delay = 100 ms

<!-- image -->

target moving sinusoidally in one dimension. The sensory feed-

back signal that conveys error in the position arrives after some period of time (the delay), and the motor system tries to correct for the error by increasing or decreasing the size of its command relative to the error (the gain). The plots show the performance in which there is either instantaneous feedback (no delay) of error (left column) or feedback with delay of 80 or 100 ms (middle and right columns). When the gain is high and the delay is low, tracking is

very good. However, when the delay increases, because the controller is compensating for errors that existed 80 or 100 ms earlier, the correction may be inappropriate for the current error. The gain can be lowered to maintain stability, but proprioceptive information from muscle spindles, the stretch of the skin, and the sight of the arm. These

modalities have different amounts of variability (or

noise) associated with them, and just as we average a set of experimental data to reduce measurement error, these sensory modalities can be combined to reduce the overall uncertainty in the state estimate. The optimal way to combine these sources is for higher brain centers to take the uncertainty of each modality into account and rely on the more certain

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 720

Increasing

gain

as the feedback controller corrects errors only slowly, tracking

At low gain (bottom row), the feedback controller corrects

errors only slowly and tracking is inaccurate. As the gain increases (middle row), the feedback controller corrects errors more rapidly and tracking performance improves. At

high gain (top row), the system corrects rapidly but is prone to overcorrect, leading to instability when the time delay in feedback is on the order of physiological time delays (top right). Because the controller is compensating for errors that existed 100 ms earlier, the correction may therefore be inappropriate for the current error. This overcorrection leads to oscillations and is one mechanism proposed to account for some forms of oscillatory tremor seen in neurological disease. modalities. For example, the location of the hand can

be sensed both by proprioception and vision. The sight

of your hand in front of you tends to be more reliable

than proprioception for estimating location along the azimuth (right–left) but less reliable for depth (forward– back). Therefore, visual input should be given greater weight than proprioceptive input when estimating the azimuth location of your hand, and vice versa for depth. By measuring the precision of each modality when used alone, it is possible to predict the increased

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Box 30–2 Bayesian Inference

## Bayesian inference is a mathematical framework for

making estimates about the world based on uncertain

information. The fundamental idea is that probabilities

(between 0 and 1) can be used to represent the degree of belief in different alternatives, such as the belief that the chance of your rolling a six with fair dice is 1 in 6. The beauty of Bayesian inference is that by using the rules of probability we can specify how beliefs should be formed and updated based on our experience

and new information from sensory input. For example, when playing tennis, we want to estimate where the ball will land. Because vision does not provide perfect information about the ball's position and velocity in flight, there is uncertainty as to the landing location. However, if we know the level of noise in our sensory system, then

precision when both are used at the same time. Experi-

ments have shown that this process is often close to

optimal. Precision can also be improved by combining

prior knowledge with sensory inputs using the mathematics of Bayesian inference (Box 30–2). Third, the motor command can also provide valuable information. If both the current state of the body and the descending motor command are known, the Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control the current sensory input can be used to compute the likelihood (ie, probability) of the particular sensory input for different potential landing locations.

We can learn additional information from repeated experience of the game: The position where the ball lands is not equally probable over the court. For exam-

ple, bounce locations are likely to be concentrated near the boundary lines where it is most difficult to return the ball. This distribution is termed the prior . The Bayes rule defines how to combine the prior and likelihood to make an optimal estimate of the bounce location. While the Bayesian approach was originally

developed in statistics, it now provides a unifying framework to understand how the brain deals with uncertainty in the perceptual, motor, and cognitive domains.

However, this estimate will tend to drift over time if

the forward model is not perfectly accurate, and there-

fore, sensory feedback is used to correct the state esti-

mate, albeit with a delay. It may seem surprising that the motor command is used in state estimation. In fact, the first demonstration of a forward model used a motor system that relies on

-only the motor command to estimate state, that is, the position of the eye within the orbit. The concept of motor prediction was first considered by Helmholtz when trying to understand how we localize visual objects. To calculate the location of an object relative to the head, the central nervous system must know both the retinal location of the object and the gaze direction of the eye. Helmholtz's ingenious suggestion was that the brain, rather than sensing the gaze direction, predicted it based on a copy of the motor command to the eye muscles. Helmholtz used a simple experiment on himself to demonstrate this. If you move your own eye without using the eye muscles (cover one eye and gently press

next state of the body can be estimated. This estimate can be derived from an internal model that represents the causal relation between actions and their con sequences. This is called a forward model because it estimates future sensory inputs based on motor outputs (Box 30–1). Thus, a forward model can be used to anticipate how the motor system's state will change as the result of a motor command. A copy of a descending motor command is passed into a forward model that acts as a neural simulator of the musculoskeletal system moving in the environment. This copy of the motor command is known as an efference copy (or corollary discharge). Forward and inverse models can be better understood if we place the two in series. If the structure and parameter values of each model are correct, the output of the forward model (the predicted behavior) will be the same as the input to the inverse model (the desired behavior) (Figure 30–3). Using the motor command to estimate the state of the body is advantageous as, unlike sensory information that is delayed, the motor command is avail-

able before it acts on the musculoskeletal system and therefore can be used to anticipate changes in the state.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 721

with your finger on your open eye through the eyelid), the retinal locations of visual objects change. Because the motor command to the eye muscles is required to update the estimate of the eye's state, the predicted eye position is not updated. However, because the retinal image has changed, this leads to the false percept that the world must have moved. A more dramatic exam -ple is that if the eye muscles are temporarily paralyzed with curare, then trying to move the eyes leads to a percept that the world is moving. This is because

18/01/21 6:00 PM
Box 30–2 Bayesian Inference

## Bayesian inference is a mathematical framework for

making estimates about the world based on uncertain

information. The fundamental idea is that probabilities

(between 0 and 1) can be used to represent the degree of belief in different alternatives, such as the belief that the chance of your rolling a six with fair dice is 1 in 6. The beauty of Bayesian inference is that by using the rules of probability we can specify how beliefs should be formed and updated based on our experience

and new information from sensory input. For example, when playing tennis, we want to estimate where the ball will land. Because vision does not provide perfect information about the ball's position and velocity in flight, there is uncertainty as to the landing location. However, if we know the level of noise in our sensory system, then

precision when both are used at the same time. Experi-

ments have shown that this process is often close to

optimal. Precision can also be improved by combining

prior knowledge with sensory inputs using the mathematics of Bayesian inference (Box 30–2). Third, the motor command can also provide valuable information. If both the current state of the body and the descending motor command are known, the Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control the current sensory input can be used to compute the likelihood (ie, probability) of the particular sensory input for different potential landing locations.

We can learn additional information from repeated experience of the game: The position where the ball lands is not equally probable over the court. For exam-

ple, bounce locations are likely to be concentrated near the boundary lines where it is most difficult to return the ball. This distribution is termed the prior . The Bayes rule defines how to combine the prior and likelihood to make an optimal estimate of the bounce location. While the Bayesian approach was originally

developed in statistics, it now provides a unifying framework to understand how the brain deals with uncertainty in the perceptual, motor, and cognitive domains.

However, this estimate will tend to drift over time if

the forward model is not perfectly accurate, and there-

fore, sensory feedback is used to correct the state esti-

mate, albeit with a delay. It may seem surprising that the motor command is used in state estimation. In fact, the first demonstration of a forward model used a motor system that relies on

-only the motor command to estimate state, that is, the position of the eye within the orbit. The concept of motor prediction was first considered by Helmholtz when trying to understand how we localize visual objects. To calculate the location of an object relative to the head, the central nervous system must know both the retinal location of the object and the gaze direction of the eye. Helmholtz's ingenious suggestion was that the brain, rather than sensing the gaze direction, predicted it based on a copy of the motor command to the eye muscles. Helmholtz used a simple experiment on himself to demonstrate this. If you move your own eye without using the eye muscles (cover one eye and gently press

next state of the body can be estimated. This estimate can be derived from an internal model that represents the causal relation between actions and their con sequences. This is called a forward model because it estimates future sensory inputs based on motor outputs (Box 30–1). Thus, a forward model can be used to anticipate how the motor system's state will change as the result of a motor command. A copy of a descending motor command is passed into a forward model that acts as a neural simulator of the musculoskeletal system moving in the environment. This copy of the motor command is known as an efference copy (or corollary discharge). Forward and inverse models can be better understood if we place the two in series. If the structure and parameter values of each model are correct, the output of the forward model (the predicted behavior) will be the same as the input to the inverse model (the desired behavior) (Figure 30–3). Using the motor command to estimate the state of the body is advantageous as, unlike sensory information that is delayed, the motor command is avail-

able before it acts on the musculoskeletal system and therefore can be used to anticipate changes in the state.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 721

with your finger on your open eye through the eyelid), the retinal locations of visual objects change. Because the motor command to the eye muscles is required to update the estimate of the eye's state, the predicted eye position is not updated. However, because the retinal image has changed, this leads to the false percept that the world must have moved. A more dramatic exam -ple is that if the eye muscles are temporarily paralyzed with curare, then trying to move the eyes leads to a percept that the world is moving. This is because

18/01/21 6:00 PM



Part V / Movement

the command leads to a state estimate that the eye

has moved, but with a fixed retinal input (due to the

paralysis), the only consistent interpretation is that the

world has moved. Finally, the best estimate of state is achieved by combining sensory modalities with motor commands. The drawbacks of using only sensory feedback or only

motor prediction can be ameliorated by monitoring both and using a forward model to estimate the current state. A neural apparatus that does this is known as an observer model. The major objectives of the observer model are to compensate for sensorimotor delays and


Previous state estimate to reduce uncertainty in the estimate of current state arising from noise in both the sensory and motor sig- nals (Figure 30–5). Such a model has been supported by empirical studies of how the nervous system estimates hand position, posture, and head orientation. We will see how such models are used to decode neural signals in brain–machine interfaces (Chapter 39). State estimation is not a passive process. Skilled performance requires the effective and efficient gathering and processing of sensory information relevant to an action. The quality of sensory information depends on our actions because what we see, hear, and touch is

2 Predicted current state

3 Final state estimate

correct the estimate of current finger position. This correction

to estimate the finger's location during movement of the arm.

<!-- image -->

A previous estimate of the distribution of possible finger posi-

tions (1, blue cloud) is updated (2, yellow cloud) using an efference copy of the motor command and a forward model of the dynamics. The updated distribution of finger positions is larger than that of the previous estimate. The model then uses a forward sensory model to predict the sensory feedback that would occur for these new finger positions, and the error between the predicted and actual sensory feedback is used to

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 722

changes the sensory error into state errors and also deter-

mines the relative reliance on the efference copy and sensory

feedback.

The final estimate of current finger position (3, purple cloud) has less uncertainty. This estimate will become the new previous estimate for subsequent movement as this sequence is repeated many times. Delays in sensory feed-

back that must be compensated have been omitted from the diagram for clarity.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

influenced by our movements. For example, the ocular

motor system controls the eyes' sensory input by ori-

enting the fovea to points of interest within the visual

scene. Thus, movement can be used to efficiently gather information, a process termed active sensing. Active sensing involves two main processes: perception, by which we process sensory information and make inferences about the world, and action, by which we choose how to sample the world to obtain useful sensory information. Eye movements can betray the difference between skilled and amateur performers. For example, a batsman in the game of cricket will make a predictive saccade to the place where he expects a bowled ball to hit the ground, wait for it to bounce, and use a pursuit eye movement to follow the ball's trajectory after the bounce. A shorter latency for this first saccade distinguishes expert from amateur batsmen. Therefore, the motor system can also be used to improve our sensing of the world so as to gather information that, in turn, helps us achieve our motor goals. Prediction Can Compensate for Sensorimotor Delays

## As we have seen, delays in feedback can lead to problems during a movement, as the delayed informa-

tion does not reflect the present state of the body and

world. Two strategies, intermittency and prediction, can compensate for such delays and thus increase accuracy of information during movement. With intermittency, movement is momentarily interrupted by rest, as in eye saccades and manual tracking. Provided the interval of rest is greater than the time delay of the sensorimotor loop, intermittency fosters more accurate sensory feedback. Prediction is a better strategy and, as we have seen, can form a major component of a state estimator. The nervous system uses different modes of control that depend on prediction and sensory feedback to different extents. These modes are nicely illustrated

by differences in object manipulation under different conditions. When an object's behavior is unpredictable, sensory feedback provides the most useful signal for estimating load. For example, when flying a kite, we need to adjust our grip almost continuously in response to unpredictable wind currents. When dealing with such unpredictability, grip force needs to be high to prevent slippage because adjustments to grip tend to lag behind changes in load force (Figure 30–6A). However, when handling objects with stable properties, predictive control mechanisms can be effective. For example, when the load is increased by a self-generated

action, such as moving the arm, the grip force increases

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 723

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control


instantaneously with load force (Figure 30–6B). Sensory

detection of the load would be too slow to account for

this rapid increase in grip force.

Such predictive control is essential for the rapid movements commonly observed in dexterous behavior. Indeed, this predictive ability can be demonstrated

easily with the "waiter task." Hold a weighty book on the palm of your hand with an outstretched arm. If you then use your other hand to remove the book (like a waiter removing objects from a tray), the supporting hand remains stationary. This shows our ability to anticipate a change in load caused by our own action and thus generate an appropriate and exquisitely timed change in muscle activity. In contrast, if someone else removes the book from your hand, even though you are watching the removal, it is close to impossible to maintain the hand stationary. We will see how cerebellar lesions affect this ability to predict, leading to a lack of such a coordinated response (Chapter 37). Detecting any discrepancies between predicted and actual sensory feedback is also essential in motor control. This discrepancy, termed sensory prediction

error, can drive learning of internal models and also be used for control. For example, when we pick up an object, we anticipate when the object will lift off the surface. The brain is particularly sensitive to the occurrence of unexpected events or the nonoccurrence of expected events (ie, to sensory prediction errors). Thus, if an object is lighter or heavier than expected and therefore lifts off too early or cannot be lifted, reactive responses are initiated. In addition to its use in compensating for delays, prediction is a key element in sensory processing. Sensory feedback can arise as a consequence of both

external events and our own movements. In the sensory receptors, these two sources are not distinguishable, as sensory signals do not carry a label of "external stimulus" or "internal stimulus." Sensitiv -ity to external events can be amplified by reducing the feedback from our own movement. Thus, sub -tracting predictions of sensory signals that arise from our own movements from the total sensory feedback enhances the signals that carry information about external events. Such a mechanism is responsible for the fact that self-tickling is a less intense experience than tickling by another. When subjects were asked to tickle themselves using a robotic interface, but a time delay was introduced between the motor command and the resulting tactile input, the ticklishness increased. With such delayed tactile input, the predictions become inaccurate and thus fails to cancel the sensory feedback, resulting in the increased tickle sensation. Such predictive modulation of sensory

18/01/21 6:00 PM


Part V / Movement

A Robot controls movement

Robot

arm moves

Load Grip force lags

<!-- image -->

Goodbody, and Wolpert 1998. Copyright © 1998 Society for

Neuroscience. A. When a subject is instructed to hold an object to which a sinusoidal load force is mechanically applied, the grip force of the fingers is high to prevent slippage, and the grip force signals by motor actions is a fundamental property of many sensory systems.

Sensory Processing Can Differ for Action and Perception

## A growing body of research supports the idea that the sensory information used to control actions is pro-

cessed in neural pathways that are distinct from the

afferent pathways that contribute to perception. It has been proposed that visual information flows in two streams in the brain (Chapter 25). A dorsal stream that projects to the posterior parietal cortex is particularly involved in the use of vision for action (Chapter 34), while a ventral stream that projects to the inferotemporal cortex is involved in conscious visual perception. This distinction between the uses of vision for action and perception is based on a double dissociation seen in patient studies. For example, the patient D.F. developed

visual agnosia after damage to her ventral stream. She is unable, for example, to indicate the orientation of a slot either verbally or with her hand. However, when asked to perform a simple action, such as putting a card

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 724

Grip

force

Load

force

lighted for a portion of the load force modulation (dark red

solid line) that leads to a corresponding grip force (dark red

dashed line), which is delayed. (Trial duration 4 s). B. When a subject generates a similar load profile by pulling down on the fixed object, the load force can be anticipated, and thus, the grip force is lower and also tracks the load force without delay. through the slot, she has no difficulty orienting her hand appropriately to put the card through the slot

(Chapter 59). Conversely, patients with damage to the

dorsal stream can develop optic ataxia in which perception is intact but control is affected. Although the distinction between perception and action arose from clinical observations, it can also be seen in normal people, as in the size–weight illusion.

When lifting two objects of different size but equal weight, people report that the smaller object feels heavier. This illusion, first documented more than 100 years ago, is both powerful and robust. It does not lessen when a person is informed that the objects are of equal weight and does not weaken with repeated lifting. When subjects begin to lift large and small objects that weigh the same, they generate larger grip and load forces for the larger object because they assume that

larger objects are heavier. After alternating between the two objects, they rapidly learn to scale their fingertip forces precisely for the true object weight (Figure 30–7). This shows that the sensorimotor system recognizes that the two weights are equal. Nevertheless, the size–weight illusion persists, suggesting not only that

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Figure 30–7 The size–weight illusion.

A. In each trial, subjects alternately lifted a large

object and a small object that weighed the same.

## Subjects thought the smaller object felt heavier

than it actually was. B. In the first trial, subjects generated greater grip and load forces for the bigger object (orange traces) as it was expected to be heavier than the

small object. In the eighth trial, the grip and load forces are the same for the two objects, showing that the sensorimotor system for this action generates grip and load forces appropriate to the weights of the two objects despite the persistent conscious perception of a difference in weight. (Adapted with permission, from Flanagan and Beltzner 2000. Copyright © 2000 Springer Nature.)

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control

A Experimental setup

<!-- image -->

Large Small object lift off Lift off for both objects

<!-- image -->

the illusion is a result of high-level cognitive centers


Grip

force

(N)

Load

force

(N)

hand along the path (ie, trajectory) can take on many

in the brain but also that the sensorimotor system can

operate independently of these centers.

Motor Plans Translate Tasks Into

Purposeful Movement

## Real-world tasks are expressed as goals: I want to pick up a glass, dance, or have lunch. However,

action requires a detailed specification of the temporal

sequence of movements powered by the 600 or so muscles in the human body. There is clearly a gap between the statement of a goal and a motor plan that recruits specific muscles in pursuit of that goal. Stereotypical Patterns Are Employed in Many Movements

## The ability of the motor systems to achieve the same task in many different ways is called redundancy. If

one way of achieving a task is not practical, there is

usually an alternative. For example, the simplest of all tasks, reaching for an object, can be achieved in infinitely many ways. The duration of the movement can be freely selected from a wide range and, given a particular choice of duration, the path and speed profile of the

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 725

different patterns. Even selecting one trajectory still

allows for infinitely many joint configurations to hold

the hand on any given point of the path. Finally, holding the arm in a fixed posture can be achieved with a wide range of muscular co-contraction levels. Therefore, for any movement, a choice must be made from a large number of alternatives. Do we all choose to move in our own way? The answer is clearly no. Repetitions of the same behavior by one individual as well as comparisons between

individuals have shown that the patterns of movement are very stereotypical. Invariance in stereotypical patterns of movement tells us something about the principles the brain uses when planning and controlling our actions. For

example, when reaching, our hand tends to follow roughly a straight path and the hand speed over time is typically smooth, unimodal, and roughly symmetric (bell-shaped, Figure 30–8). The tendency to make straight-line movements characterizes a large class of movements and is surprising given that the muscles act to rotate joints. To achieve such a straight-line movement of the hand requires complex joint rotations. The motions of the joints in series (the shoulder, elbow, and wrist) are

complicated and vary greatly with different initial and final positions. Because rotation at a single joint would

18/01/21 6:00 PM




Part V / Movement

Figure 30–8 Hand path and velocity

have stereotypical features. (Adapted,

with permission, from Morasso 1981.

Copyright © 1981 Springer Nature.) A. The subject sits in front of a semicircular plate and grasps the handle of a two-jointed apparatus that moves in the

- horizontal plane and records hand position. The subject is instructed to move the hand between various targets (T1–T6). B. The paths traced by one subject while moving his hand between targets. C. Kinematic data for three hand paths
- (c , d, and e) shown in panel B. All paths are roughly straight, and all hand speed

profiles have the same shape and scale in proportion to the distance covered. In contrast, the profiles for the angular velocity of the elbow and shoulder for the three hand paths differ. The straight hand paths and common profiles for speed suggest that planning is done with reference to the hand because these parameters can be linearly scaled. Planning with reference to joints would require computing nonlinear combinations of joint angles.

produce an arc at the hand, both elbow and shoulder


T3

<!-- image -->

joints must be rotated concurrently to produce a straight

path. In some directions, the elbow moves more than the

shoulder; in others, the reverse occurs. When the hand is moved from one side of the body to the other (Figure 30–8, movement from T2 to T5), one or both joints may have to reverse direction in midcourse. The fact that hand trajectories are more invariant than joint trajectories suggests that the motor system is more concerned with controlling the hand, even at the cost of generating complex patterns of joint rotations. Such task-centered motor plans can account for our ability to perform a specific action, such as writing, in different ways with more or less the same result.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 726

T5

T6

Handwriting is structurally similar regardless of the size

of the letters or the limb or body segment used to pro-

duce it (Figure 30–9). This phenomenon, termed motor

equivalence, suggests that purposeful movements are represented in the brain abstractly rather than as sets of specific joint motions or muscle contractions. Such abstract representations of movement, which are able to drive different effectors, provide a degree of flexibility of action not practical with preset motor programs. Motor Planning Can Be Optimal at Reducing Costs

Why do humans choose one particular manner of per-

## forming a task out of the infinite number of possibilities?

18/01/21 6:00 PM

T4

Figure 30–9 Motor equivalence.

The ability of different motor systems

to achieve the same behavior is called

## motor equivalence. For example, writing can be performed using different

parts of the body. The examples here were written by the same person using the right (dominant) hand (A), the right hand with the wrist immobilized (B), the left hand (C), the pen gripped between the teeth (D), and the pen attached to the foot (E). (Reproduced, with permission, from Raibert 1977.)

A Right hand

<!-- image -->

Extensive research has attempted to answer this ques-

tion, and the fundamental idea that has emerged is that

planning can be equated with choosing the best way to

achieve a task. Mathematically, this is equivalent to the process of optimizing (ie, minimizing) a cost associated with the movement. The cost is a way of quantifying what is good or bad about a movement (eg, energy, accuracy, stability) with a single number. Different ways of achieving a task will lead to different costs. This allows all possible solutions to be ranked, thus identifying the one with the lowest cost.

Invariances in our movements will reflect the particular cost we care about for that type of movement. Many costs have been proposed, but currently, most successful theories propose that there are two main components to movement cost: task success and effort. The effort component means that we want to achieve success but with minimal energetic cost. To understand how task success is a component of the cost, it is useful to understand what leads to lack of success. Having inaccurate internal models or

processing clearly limits our ability to complete tasks, and motor learning is designed to keep these processes accurate. However, low-level components in the motor system, such as motor noise, limit success. Movements tend to be variable, and the variability tends to increase with the speed or force of the movement. Part of this increase is caused by random variation in both the excitability of motor neurons and the recruitment of additional motor units needed to increase force. Incremental increases in force are produced by progressively smaller sets of motor neurons, each of which produces disproportionately greater increments

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 727

of force (Chapter 31). Therefore, as force increases,

fluctuations in the number of motor neurons lead to

greater fluctuations in force.

The consequences of this can be observed experimentally by asking subjects to generate a constant force. The variability of such force production increases

with the level of the force. Over a large range, this increase in variability is captured by a constant coefficient of variation (the standard deviation divided by the mean force). This dependence of variability on force also increases the variability of pointing movements as the speed of movement increases (as greater speed requires greater muscle force). The decrease in movement accuracy with increasing speed is known as the speed–accuracy trade-off (Figure 30–10). This relationship is not fixed, and part of skill learning, such as learning to play the piano, involves being able to increase speed without sacrificing accuracy. In general, effort and accuracy are in conflict. Accuracy requires energy because corrections require muscular activity and thus comes at some

cost. The trade-off between accuracy and energy varies for different movements. When walking, we could choose to step gingerly to ensure we never trip, but this would require substantial energy use. Therefore, we are willing to save energy by allowing ourselves the risk of occasionally tripping. In contrast, while eating with a knife and fork, we prioritize accuracy over energy to ensure the fork does not end up in our cheek. The optimal movement is thus the one that minimizes the bad consequences of noise while saving energy. One way to do this is to specify a desired

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control



Part V / Movement

<!-- image -->



<!-- image -->

Movement time (ms)


straight line lying perpendicular to the direction in which they

moved the stylus. Subjects started from one of three different initial positions and were required to complete the movement within three different times (140, 170, or 200 ms). A trial was successful if the subject completed the movement within 10% of the required time. Only successful trials were used for analysis. Subjects were informed when a trial was not successful. The variability in the motion of the subjects' arm movements is shown in the plot as the standard deviation of the movement endpoint plotted against average speed (for each of three movement starting points and three movement times, giving nine data points). The variability in movement increases in proportion to the speed and therefore to the force producing the movement. (Adapted, with permission, from Schmidt et al. 1979.) movement trajectory or sequence of states that can be

considered optimal. Although noise and environmen-

tal disturbances can cause the motor system to devi-

ate from the desired behavior, the role of feedback is simply to return the movement back to the desired trajectory. However, this approach is not necessarily computationally efficient. Rather than specifying the desired state of the body, we can specify an optimal feedback controller to generate the movement.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 728

Optimal Feedback Control Corrects for Errors in a

Task-Dependent Manner

## Optimal feedback control aims to minimize a cost such as a combination of energy and task inaccuracy

(Chapter 34). This type of feedback control is based on

the idea that people do not plan a trajectory given a particular cost. Instead, the cost is used to create a feedback controller that specifies, for example, how the feedback gain for positional errors (and other errors such as velocity and force) changes over time. Therefore, given the goal of the task, the controller specifies the motor command suitable for different possible states of the body. The trajectory is then simply a consequence of applying the feedback control law to the current estimate of the state of the body (Figure 30–11). The feedback controller is optimal in that it can minimize the cost even in the presence of potential disturbances. Optimal feedback control, therefore, does not make a hard distinction between feedforward and feedback control. Rather, during a task, the balance between

feedforward and feedback control varies along a continuum that depends on the extent to which the estimate of current body state is influenced by predictions (feedforward) or by sensory input (feedback). An important feature of optimal feedback control is that it will correct only for deviations that are task relevant and allow variation in task-irrelevant devia -

tions. For example, when reaching to open an exit door that has a long horizontal handle, it is of little importance where along the handle one makes contact, so deviations in the horizontal direction can be ignored. Such considerations lead naturally to the minimal intervention principle that one should only intervene in an ongoing task if deviations will affect task success. Intervening will generally add noise into the system (and require an increased effort), so intervening unnecessarily will lead to a decrement in perfor-

mance. The aim of optimal feedback control is not to eliminate all variability, but to allow it to accumulate in dimensions that do not interfere with the task while minimizing it in the dimensions relevant for the task completion. The minimal intervention principle is supported by studies that show that feedback does not always return the system to the unperturbed trajectory but often acts in a manner to reduce the effect of the disturbance on the achievement of the task goal and to ensure that corrections are task-dependent. Optimal feedback control emphasizes the setting of feedback gains, which can be partially instantiated by reflexes that generate rapid motor responses.

Optimal feedback control proposes that these rapid responses should be highly tuned to the task at hand.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Task Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control Optimal feedback control law High State estimator Position that the movement is the best it can be in the presence of internal noise and external perturbations. The optimal behavior tends to let variability (blue ellipsoid, showing the possible

<!-- image -->

the sensorimotor system specifies a cost that is a combination

of accuracy (eg, distance of the finger to the bar) and effort. To generate a movement that minimizes this cost, the sensorimotor system sets up an optimal feedback control rule that specifies the time-varying gains. These gains specify how the motor command should depend on states such as positional error and hand velocity. The form of this feedback control law assures Although the short-latency (monosynaptic) stretch reflex responds only to muscle stretch, the long-

latency response has long been known to respond to

task-dependent factors (Chapter 32). Optimal feedback control is important because it combines trajectory generation, noise, and motor cost and provides a clear comparison for the results of experimental work. Multiple Processes Contribute to

Motor Learning

## Animals have a remarkable capacity for learning new motor skills simply through everyday interaction with

their environment. Although evolution can hard wire

some innate behaviors, such as the ability of a foal

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 729

final locations of the hand) accumulate in dimensions that do not affect task success (task-irrelevant variability), such as along the axis of the bar, while controlling variability that would lead to the hand missing the bar (task-relevant variability). Three paths for reaching from the same starting point are shown; corrections are made only in the task-relevant dimension. to stand or a spider to spin a web, motor learning is required to adapt to new and varying environments.

New motor skills cannot be acquired by fixed neural

systems. Sensorimotor systems must constantly adapt over a lifetime as body size and proportions change,

thereby maintaining an appropriate relationship between motor commands and body mechanics. In addition, learning is the only way to acquire motor skills that are defined by social convention, such as writing or dancing. Most forms of motor learning involve procedural or implicit learning, so-called because subjects are generally unable to express what it is they have learned.

Implicit learning often takes place without consciously thinking about it and can be retained for extended periods of time without practice (Chapter 52). Typical examples of procedural learning are learning to ride a

18/01/21 6:00 PM



Part V / Movement

bicycle or play the piano. In contrast, declarative or explicit

learning refers to knowledge that can be expressed in

statements about the world and is available to intro

-

spection (Chapter 52). Memorizing the names of the cranial nerves or the directions to the local hospital are examples of explicit learning. Declarative memory tends to be easily forgotten, although repeated exposure can lead to long-lasting retention. We use explicit learning strategies when initially learning some motor tasks, such as driving a car, but the skill becomes automatic with time and practice. Motor learning can occur more or less immediately or over time. We learn to pick up an object of unknown weight almost immediately, and we learn to ride a bicy-

cle after a few weeks of practice, but mastering the piano requires years. These different timescales may reflect the intrinsic difficulty of the task as well as evolutionary constraints that have to be unlearned to perform the task. For example, piano playing requires learning precise control of individual fingers, whereas in normal movements, such as reaching and grasping, individuated finger movements are rare. Sensorimotor learning can be divided into two broad, but overlapping, classes: adaptations to alterations in the properties of sensorimotor systems and learning new skills. We focus on each in turn. Error-Based Learning Involves Adapting Internal Sensorimotor Models

## Error-based learning is the driving force behind many well-studied sensorimotor adaptation paradigms. For

example, the relation between the visual and proprio-

ceptive location of a limb can be altered by wearing prismatic glasses (or even spectacles). This shifts the visual input so that a person's reach for an object is misdirected. Over repeated attempts, the reach trajectories are adjusted to account for the discrepancy between vision and proprioception, a process termed visuomotor learning. Similarly, to control a computer mouse, we must learn the kinematic relation between the movement of the mouse and the cursor on the screen. In addition, the properties of the limbs change with both growth and tool use. The brain must adapt to such changes by reorganizing or adjusting motor commands. In error-based learning, the sensorimotor system senses the outcome of each movement and compares this to both the desired outcome and the predicted

outcome. For example, when shooting a basketball the desired outcome is for the ball to go through the hoop. However, once you let go of the ball you may predict that the ball will miss to the right of the hoop. The difference between the prediction and actual outcome, termed the sensory prediction error, can be used to

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 730

update the internal model of how the ball responds to

your actions. The difference between the actual and

desired outcome, termed the target error, can be used

to adjust your plan (i.e. aim direction) to reduce the error. Both sensory prediction errors and target errors are important for driving learning. Additional transformations may have to be applied to the error signal before it can be used to train an internal model. For example, when we throw

a dart, errors are received in visual coordinates. This sensory error must be converted into motor command errors suitable for updating a control process such as an inverse model. Error-based learning tends to lead to trial-by-trial reduction in error as the motor system learns the novel sensorimotor properties. An example of such error-based learning in reaching occurs when the dynamics of the arm are unexpectedly changed. As we saw earlier, we normally

move the hand with a straight-line path to reach an object. Unexpected dynamic interactions can produce curved paths, but subjects learn to anticipate and compensate for these effects. This learning is conveniently studied by having subjects make reaching movements while holding the end of a robotic apparatus that can introduce novel forces on the arm (Figure 30–12A–C). Applying a force that is proportional to the speed of the hand but that acts at right angles to the direction of movement will produce a curved movement before finally reaching the target. Over time, the subject adapts to this perturbation and is able to maintain a straight-line movement (Figure 30–12D). Subjects might adapt to such a situation in either of two ways. Subjects could co-contract the muscles in their arm, thereby stiffening the arm and reducing

the impact of the perturbation, or they could learn an internal model that compensates for the anticipated force. By examining the aftereffects (movements after the robot is turned off), we can distinguish between these two forms of learning. If the arm simply stiffens, it should continue to move in a straight path. If a new internal model is learned, the new model should compensate for a force that no longer exists, thereby producing a path in the direction opposite from the earlier perturbation. Early in learning, co-contraction is used to reduce the errors before an internal model can be learned, but the co-contraction then decreases as the internal model is able to compensate for the perturbation. Therefore, when the force is turned off after learning, subjects normally show a large aftereffect in the opposite direction, demonstrating that they have compensated for the perturbation (Figure 30–12D). Such error-based processes appear to underlie adaptation across a number of different movement

18/01/21 6:00 PM
Part V / Movement

bicycle or play the piano. In contrast, declarative or explicit

learning refers to knowledge that can be expressed in

statements about the world and is available to intro

-

spection (Chapter 52). Memorizing the names of the cranial nerves or the directions to the local hospital are examples of explicit learning. Declarative memory tends to be easily forgotten, although repeated exposure can lead to long-lasting retention. We use explicit learning strategies when initially learning some motor tasks, such as driving a car, but the skill becomes automatic with time and practice. Motor learning can occur more or less immediately or over time. We learn to pick up an object of unknown weight almost immediately, and we learn to ride a bicy-

cle after a few weeks of practice, but mastering the piano requires years. These different timescales may reflect the intrinsic difficulty of the task as well as evolutionary constraints that have to be unlearned to perform the task. For example, piano playing requires learning precise control of individual fingers, whereas in normal movements, such as reaching and grasping, individuated finger movements are rare. Sensorimotor learning can be divided into two broad, but overlapping, classes: adaptations to alterations in the properties of sensorimotor systems and learning new skills. We focus on each in turn. Error-Based Learning Involves Adapting Internal Sensorimotor Models

## Error-based learning is the driving force behind many well-studied sensorimotor adaptation paradigms. For

example, the relation between the visual and proprio-

ceptive location of a limb can be altered by wearing prismatic glasses (or even spectacles). This shifts the visual input so that a person's reach for an object is misdirected. Over repeated attempts, the reach trajectories are adjusted to account for the discrepancy between vision and proprioception, a process termed visuomotor learning. Similarly, to control a computer mouse, we must learn the kinematic relation between the movement of the mouse and the cursor on the screen. In addition, the properties of the limbs change with both growth and tool use. The brain must adapt to such changes by reorganizing or adjusting motor commands. In error-based learning, the sensorimotor system senses the outcome of each movement and compares this to both the desired outcome and the predicted

outcome. For example, when shooting a basketball the desired outcome is for the ball to go through the hoop. However, once you let go of the ball you may predict that the ball will miss to the right of the hoop. The difference between the prediction and actual outcome, termed the sensory prediction error, can be used to

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 730

update the internal model of how the ball responds to

your actions. The difference between the actual and

desired outcome, termed the target error, can be used

to adjust your plan (i.e. aim direction) to reduce the error. Both sensory prediction errors and target errors are important for driving learning. Additional transformations may have to be applied to the error signal before it can be used to train an internal model. For example, when we throw

a dart, errors are received in visual coordinates. This sensory error must be converted into motor command errors suitable for updating a control process such as an inverse model. Error-based learning tends to lead to trial-by-trial reduction in error as the motor system learns the novel sensorimotor properties. An example of such error-based learning in reaching occurs when the dynamics of the arm are unexpectedly changed. As we saw earlier, we normally

move the hand with a straight-line path to reach an object. Unexpected dynamic interactions can produce curved paths, but subjects learn to anticipate and compensate for these effects. This learning is conveniently studied by having subjects make reaching movements while holding the end of a robotic apparatus that can introduce novel forces on the arm (Figure 30–12A–C). Applying a force that is proportional to the speed of the hand but that acts at right angles to the direction of movement will produce a curved movement before finally reaching the target. Over time, the subject adapts to this perturbation and is able to maintain a straight-line movement (Figure 30–12D). Subjects might adapt to such a situation in either of two ways. Subjects could co-contract the muscles in their arm, thereby stiffening the arm and reducing

the impact of the perturbation, or they could learn an internal model that compensates for the anticipated force. By examining the aftereffects (movements after the robot is turned off), we can distinguish between these two forms of learning. If the arm simply stiffens, it should continue to move in a straight path. If a new internal model is learned, the new model should compensate for a force that no longer exists, thereby producing a path in the direction opposite from the earlier perturbation. Early in learning, co-contraction is used to reduce the errors before an internal model can be learned, but the co-contraction then decreases as the internal model is able to compensate for the perturbation. Therefore, when the force is turned off after learning, subjects normally show a large aftereffect in the opposite direction, demonstrating that they have compensated for the perturbation (Figure 30–12D). Such error-based processes appear to underlie adaptation across a number of different movement

18/01/21 6:00 PM

A Experimental setup

<!-- image -->



Initial exposure B Null eld

<!-- image -->

2 Adaptation

Figure 30–12 Learning improves the accuracy of reaching

in a novel dynamic environment. (Adapted, with permission,

from Brashers-Krug, Shadmehr, and Bizzi 1996. Copyright ©

1996 Springer Nature.) A. A subject holds a robotic apparatus that measures the position and velocity of the hand and applies forces to the hand. B. When the motors are off (null field), the subject makes

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

approximately straight movements from the center of the workspace to targets arrayed in a circle.

- types and effectors, from the eye to whole-body move-

ments. For example, our normal symmetric pattern of

gait seems to rely on error-based learning. When the gait

pattern of subjects is perturbed by walking on a split-belt treadmill in which one belt moves faster than the other, they initially limp. However, step by step the gait pattern naturally regains its symmetry (Figure 30–13), thus showing that error-based learning can drive complex whole-body coordinated movements. There is extensive evidence that fast trial-by-trial error-based learning relies on the cerebellum (Chapter 37). Motor adaptation may not be a single unitary process. Recent evidence suggests that adaptation is driven by interacting processes whose outputs are

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 731


Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control

C Perturbing force

## 1

Hand velocity (y)

<!-- image -->


3 Aftereffects

C. A clockwise force is then applied to the hand, shown as a

function of hand velocity. This field produces a force propor-

tional to the speed of the hand that always acts at right angles

<!-- image -->

to the current direction of motion.

D. Initially, the hand paths are severely perturbed in response to the perturbing force (1). After some time, the subject adapts and can again follow a straight path during the entire movement (2). When the motors are then turned off, movement is again per-

- turbed, but in a direction opposite to the earlier perturbation (3).

combined. These interacting processes could have dif-

ferent temporal properties: one process quickly adapt-

ing to perturbations but also rapidly forgetting what

was learned and the other learning more slowly but retaining learning for a longer period (Figure 30–13B). The advantage of such a mechanism is that the learning processes can be matched to the temporal properties of the perturbations, which can range from short-lived (fatigue) to long-lasting (growth). Although motor learning often takes much practice, once a task is no longer performed, deadaptation is typically faster. However, the sensory inputs

associated with the particular action can be enough to switch behavior. When subjects wear prismatic glasses

18/01/21 6:00 PM

15 N



Part V / Movement


Baseline Adaptation Deadaptation

<!-- image -->

Slow belt

Fast belt

Figure 30–13 Learning new coordination patterns in

walking.

<!-- image -->

A. A subject walks on a split-belt treadmill. When the two belts

move at the same speed, subjects have a symmetric gait pattern with equal step lengths.

B. In an adaptation study, the speeds of the belts are initially the same, then become split so that the right belt moves faster than the left, and then finally return to the same speed (top).

Step length symmetry is initially lost when the belts move at different speeds, causing the subject to limp. Over time, the symmetry is restored and the limping is abolished. When the belts are once again moving at the same speed, an aftereffect is seen (middle). that shift visual space, for example, they initially miss

when reaching to targets but soon learn to reach cor-

rectly. After repeated trials, the mere feel of the glasses,

without the prisms in place, is sufficient to evoke the adaptive behavior appropriate for the prisms. In general, we can quantify performance with two measurements, accuracy and precision. Accuracy is a measure of systematic errors or biases, for exam-

ple, on average how far a series of thrown darts are away from the target. In contrast, precision is a measure of random errors, or statistical variability, in our actions. Both accuracy and precision contribute to performance. In general, accuracy can be improved by adapting or calibrating motor commands so as to reduce systematic errors. Although there is always some variability in movement arising from irreducible sensory and motor noise, the variability, as we have seen, can be reduced through planning so as to have minimal impact on task success. Most motor learning tends to become automatic (ie, implicit) with time, but early learning of some tasks can be aided by explicit learning (ie, strategy), such as a verbal instruction on how best to approach the task.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 732

Belt speed Fast belt Slow belt

Maurice Smith and colleagues have shown that this type

of adaptation is composed of multiple underlying processes

that adapt on different timescales (bottom). The change in the

step length symmetry is composed of two processes: a fast process (light green line) that adapts quickly but also rapidly forgets what has been learned, and a slow process (dark green line) that learns more slowly but has better retention. These processes both adapt to learn from the error, and the sum of these processes is the final adaptation (blue line). This dualrate learning system gives rise to the typical double exponential learning curves seen in many forms of adaptation in which adaptation is initially fast but tends to slow down as learning proceeds. (Adapted, with permission, from Roemmich, Long, and Bastian 2016.) Not all sensory modalities are equally important

in learning all motor tasks. In learning dynamic tasks,

proprioception and tactile input are more important

than vision. We normally learn dynamic tasks equally well with or without vision. However, individuals who have lost proprioception and tactile input have particular difficulty controlling the dynamic properties of their limbs or learning new dynamic tasks without vision (Box 30–3). Skill Learning Relies on Multiple Processes for Success

## In contrast to error-based learning in which the sensorimotor system adapts to a perturbation to return to pre-

perturbation performance, learning skills such as tying

one's shoelaces, juggling, typing, or playing the piano instead involves improving performance in the absence of a perturbation. Such learning tends to improve the speed–accuracy trade-off. Initially, we may be able to hit the correct keys on a keyboard when paced 1 second apart, but with practice, the same accuracy can be achieved at an increasingly quickening pace.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

125°

60°

<!-- image -->

reversal in path.  (Left) The subject tries to trace a template

(gray line) while her hand is hidden from view. The joint angles for the elbow and shoulder of a normal subject show good alignment (Right top), leading to an accurate reversal

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 733

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control

Box 30–3 Proprioception and Tactile Sense Are Critical for Sensorimotor Control

## While visual impairment certainly has limiting effects on sensorimotor control, blind people are able to walk patients completely incapacitated in the dark. Some of this difficulty reflects an inability to detect errors that

normally and reach and grasp known objects with ease.

This is in stark contrast to the rare loss of proprioceptive and tactile sense. Some sensory neuropathies selectively damage the large-diameter sensory fibers in peripheral nerves and dorsal roots that carry most proprioceptive informa-

tion. Impairments in motor control resulting from loss of proprioception have fascinated neurologists and physiologists for well over a century. Studies of patients with sensory neuropathies provide invaluable insight into the interactions between sensation and movement planning. As expected, such patients lose joint position sense, vibration sense, and fine tactile discrimination (as well as tendon reflexes), but both pain and temperature

senses are fully preserved. Patients with peripheral neuropathies are unable to maintain a steady posture, for example, while holding a cup or standing, with the eyes closed. Movements also become clumsy, uncoordinated, and inaccurate. Some recovery of function may occur over many months as the patient learns to use vision as a substitute for proprioception, but this compensation still leaves

Control develop during unseen movements, as occurs if the weight of an object differs from expectation. Peripheral neuropathies are particularly incapacitating when patients try to make movements with rapid direction reversals. Analyses of the joint torques during these movements show that subjects with intact proprioception anticipate intersegmental torques, whereas those without proprioception fail to do so (Figure 30–14). However, the same patients easily adapt to drastic kinematic changes, such as tracing a drawing while viewing their hand in a mirror. In fact, they perform better than normal subjects, perhaps because they have learned to guide their movements visually and, because they lack proprioception, do not experience any conflict between vision and proprioception. Even in normal subjects, the relative importance of tactile input in manipulation tasks can be easily demonstrated. It is relatively easy to light a match with one's eyes closed. However, if the tips of the digits are made numb with local anesthetic, then even under full vision the task is remarkably hard because the match tends to slip from the fingers.

Flex

Extend

Elbow

Shoulder

20°

(Left top). In contrast, the timing of the joint reversal is poor

in subjects who lack proprioceptive input (Right bottom), lead-

ing to large errors in the path (Left bottom). These patients

cannot anticipate and correct for the intersegmental dynamics that occur around the path reversal. (Adapted, with permission, from Sainburg et al. 1995.)


18/01/21 6:00 PM


Part V / Movement

For some skills, there can be a complex relation

between the actions performed and success or failure

at the task. For example, when children first sit on a

swing, they have to learn the complex sequence of leg and body movements required to make the swing go higher. In contrast to error-based learning, there is no readily available error signal that can be used to adjust the current action because the swing's height is not directly determined by the current action but by a long history of body and leg motion. Learning in such complex scenarios can be achieved using reinforcement learning in which the sensorimotor system adjusts its commands in an effort to maximize reward, that is, task success. In the most general form, the performance measure that the reinforcement learning tries to maximize is the sum of all future rewards. However, as we tend to favor an immediate versus time-delayed reward, the sum is typically weighted to reflect this by progressively discounting future rewards. Reinforcement learning is more general than errorbased learning in that the training signal is success or failure, rather than an error at each point in time.

Another distinguishing property of reinforcement learning is that the success or failure that the learning system receives can depend in nontrivial ways on the history of the actions taken. For tasks that require a complex sequence of actions to take place to achieve a goal, such as tying one's shoelaces, and the outcome or reward is removed in time from the action, error-based learning cannot easily be applied. A key problem that reinforcement solves is that of credit assignment: Which action within a sequence should we credit or blame when we eventually succeed or fail? This is just the sort of problem reinforcement learning algorithms are good at solving. There are two main classes of reinforcement learning, those that depend on an internal model and those that do not. Model-based reinforcement builds

a model of the task (eg, the structure of a maze). With such a model, the learner can efficiently plan in a goal-directed manner. In contrast, with model-free reinforcement learning, the learner simply associates movements with success or failure; those that lead to success are more likely to be performed again. Such learning can lead to motor habits. While model-free learning avoids the computational burden of building a model, it is also less able to generalize to novel situations. These two types of reinforcement learning can even act together, and different tasks can rely on them to different extents. Dopaminergic systems in the basal ganglia have been tied to signals that one would expect in reinforcement learning, such as expected reward. Moreover, dysfunction in these systems is related to

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 734

movement disorders, addiction, and other problems that

could be related to reinforcement signals (Chapter 38).

Finally, the development of efficient strategies plays

a key part in motor skill acquisition. Skill learning for real-world tasks typically involves a sequence of

decision-making processes at different spatiotemporal scales. The skill of a tennis player, for example, is not only determined by the precision with which she can strike the ball but also by the speed with which she can make the correct decision on where to aim it and how well she uses her senses to extract task-relevant information. Sensorimotor Representations Constrain Learning

The information obtained during a single movement is

## often too sparse or noisy to unambiguously determine

the source of error. For example, if a tennis player hits

a shot into the net on the serve, the problem could be that the ball was not thrown high enough, the ball was hit too early, the racquet strings are loose, there was a gust of wind, or the player is fatigued. If the racquet dynamics have changed, the player would do well to adapt to these for the next shot. If a temporary gust of wind was the problem, then no adjustment is needed. To resolve this issue, the sensorimotor learning system constrains the way in which the system is updated in response to errors. These constraints reflect the internal assumptions about the task structure and the source of errors and determine how the system represents the task. Indeed, on a slower timescale, learning itself can alter the representation. While the final output of the motor system is the contraction of its 600 or so muscles, it is not the case that the brain controls each independently. In current mod-

els of sensorimotor control, motor commands are generated by multiple modules that can be selectively engaged depending on the requirements of the task. Examples of modular architectures include multiple internal models, motor primitives, and motor synergies (Chapter 36). Motor primitives can be thought of as neural control modules that can be flexibly combined to generate a large repertory of behaviors. A primitive might

represent the temporal profile of a particular muscle activity or a set of muscles that are activated together, termed a synergy. The overall motor output will be the sum of all primitives, weighted by the level of the activation of each module. The makeup of the population of such primitives then determines which structural constraints are imposed on learning. For example, a behavior for which the motor system has many primitives will be easy to learn, whereas a behavior that cannot be approximated by any existing primitives would be impossible to learn.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

Highlights

1.

The primary purpose of the elaborate informa-

tion processing and storage that occurs in the

brain is to enable us to interact with our environ

-

- ment through our motor system. 2. Our infinitely varied and purposeful motor behaviors are governed by the integrated actions of the motor systems, including the motor cortex,
- spinal cord, cerebellum, and basal ganglia. 3. To control action, the central nervous system uses a hierarchy of sensorimotor transformations that convert incoming sensory information into
- motor outputs. 4. There is a trade-off in the speed versus sophistication of the different levels of sensorimotor response from rapid reflexes to slower voluntary control.
5. The motor systems generate commands using feedforward circuits or error-correcting feedback circuits; most movement involves both types of
- control. 6. The brain uses internal models of the sensorimo tor system to facilitate control. 7. The state of the body is estimated using both sen-

Selected Reading

Diedrichsen J, Shadmehr R, Ivry RB. 2010. The coordina-

tion of movement: optimal feedback control and beyond.

## -Trends Cogn Sci 14:31–39.

- sory and motor signals together with a forward predictive mode to reduce the adverse effects of
- Roemmich RT, Bastian AJ. 2018. Closing the loop: From motor neuroscience to neurorehabilitation. Annu Rev Neurosci 41:415–429.
- delays in feedback. 8. Variability in the sensory inputs and motor outputs together with inaccuracies in sensorimotor transformations underlie the errors and variabil
- Scott SH. 2016. A functional taxonomy of bottom-up sensory feedback processing for motor actions. Trends Neurosci 39:512–526.
- -Shadmehr R, Smith MA, Krakauer JW. 2010. Error correction, sensory prediction, and adaptation in motor control. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:89–108.
- Wolpert DM, Diedrichsen J, Flanagan JR. 2011. Principles of sensorimotor learning. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:739–751. Wolpert DM, Flanagan JR. 2016. Computations underlying
- sensorimotor learning. Curr Opin Neurobiol 37:7–11.
- References Blakemore SJ, Frith CD, Wolpert DM. 1999. Spatio-temporal

prediction modulates the perception of self-produced

stimuli. J Cogn Neurosci 11:551–559.

- Blakemore SJ, Goodbody S, Wolpert DM. 1998. Predicting the consequences of our own actions: the role of sensorimotor context estimation. J Neurosci 18:7511–7518.
- Brashers-Krug T, Shadmehr R, Bizzi E. 1996. Consolidation in human motor memory. Nature 382:252–255. Burdet E, Osu R, Franklin DW, Milner TE, Kawato M. 2001.
- The central nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics by learning optimal impedance. Nature 414:446–449.
- Craik KJW. 1943. The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. Crapse TB, Sommer MA. 2008. Corollary discharge across
- the animal kingdom. Nature Rev Neurosci 9:587. Crevecoeur F, Scott SH. 2013. Priors engaged in long-latency
- responses to mechanical perturbations suggest a rapid update in state estimation. PLoS Comput Biol 9:e1003177.

18/01/21 6:00 PM

- ity in movement, leading to the trade-off between speed and accuracy. 9. Motor planning can use the redundancy of the motor system to move in such a way as to reduce the negative consequences of motor noise while
- reducing effort. 10. Motor control circuits are not static but undergo continual modification and recalibration throughout life.
11. Motor learning improves motor control in novel situations, and different forms of sensory information are vital for learning. Error-based learn-
- ing is particularly important for adapting to simple sensorimotor perturbations. Reinforcement learning is particularly important for more complex skill learning and can rely on a model (model-based) or on simply reinforcing motor actions directly (model-free). 12. The motor representations used by the brain constrain the way the sensorimotor system updates during learning.
13. Studies of sensorimotor control have focused on developing a detailed understanding of

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 735

Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control


relatively simple tasks, such as reaching and

walking. Although these tasks are amenable to

analysis and modeling, they do not capture the

full complexity of real-world motor control. The challenge will be to determine if these principles can be generalized to tasks such as tying shoelaces and learning to skateboard.

Daniel M. Wolpert

Amy J. Bastian


Part V / Movement

Crevecoeur F, Scott SH. 2014. Beyond muscles stiffness:

importance of state-estimation to account for very fast

motor corrections. PLoS Comput Biol 10:e1003869.

- Diedrichsen J, Kornysheva K. 2015. Motor skill learning between selection and execution. Trends Cogn Sci 19:227–233.
- Ernst MO, Bulthoff HH. 2004. Merging the senses into a robust percept. Trends Cogn Sci 8:162–169. Faisal AA, Selen LP, Wolpert DM. 2008. Noise in the nervous
- system. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:292–303. Flanagan JR, Beltzner MA. 2000. Independence of perceptual
- and sensorimotor predictions in the size-weight illusion. Nat Neurosci 3:737–741.
- Goodale MA, Milner AD. 1992. Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends Neurosci 15:20–25. Harris CM, Wolpert DM. 1998. Signal-dependent noise deter-
- mines motor planning. Nature 394:780–784. Huberdeau DM, Krakauer JW, Haith AM. 2015. Dual-process
- decomposition in human sensorimotor adaptation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33:71–77.
- Krakauer JW, Mazzoni P. 2011. Human sensorimotor learning: adaptation, skill, and beyond. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21:636–644.
- Land MF, McLeod P. 2000. From eye movements to actions: how batsmen hit the ball. Nat Neurosci 3:1340–1345. McDougle SD, Ivry RB, Taylor JA. 2016. Taking aim at the
- cognitive side of learning in sensorimotor adaptation tasks. Trends Cogn Sci 20:535-544.
- Morasso P. 1981. Spatial control of arm movements. Exp Brain Res 42:223–227. Muller H, Sternad D. 2004. Decomposition of variability in
- the execution of goal-oriented tasks: three components of skill improvement. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform
- 30:212–233. O'Doherty JP, Lee SW, McNamee D. 2015. The structure of reinforcement-learning mechanisms in the human brain. Curr Opin Behav Sci 1:94–100.
- Pruszynski JA, Scott SH. 2012. Optimal feedback control and the long-latency stretch response. Exp Brain Res 218:341–359.
- Raibert MH. 1977. Motor control and learning by the state space model. Ph.D. Dissertation. Cambridge, MA: Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT.

Kandel-Ch30\_0707-0736.indd 736

Reisman DS, Block HJ, Bastian AJ. 2005. Interlimb coordina-

tion during locomotion: what can be adapted and stored?

J Neurophysiol 94:2403–2415.

- Roemmich RT, Long AW, Bastian AJ. 2016. Seeing the errors you feel enhances locomotor performance but not learning. Curr Biol 26:1–10.
- Rothwell JC, Traub MM, Day BL, Obeso JA, Thomas PK, Marsden CD. 1982. Manual motor performance in a deafferented man. Brain 105:515–542.
- Sainburg RL, Ghilardi MF, Poizner H, Ghez C. 1995. Control of limb dynamics in normal subjects and patients without proprioception. J Neurophysiol 73:820–835.
- Schmidt RA, Zelaznik H, Hawkins B, Frank JS, Quinn JT. 1979. Motor-output variability: a theory for the accuracy of rapid motor acts. Psychol Rev 47:415–451.
- Scott SH, Cluff T, Lowrey CR, Takei T. 2015. Feedback control during voluntary motor actions. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33:85–94.
- Sing GC, Joiner WM, Nanayakkara T, Brayanov JB, Smith MA. 2009. Primitives for motor adaptation reflect correlated neural tuning to position and velocity. Neuron 64:575–589.
- Smith MA, Ghazizadeh A, Shadmehr R. 2006. Interacting adaptive processes with different timescales underlie short-term motor learning. PLoS Biol 4:e179.
- Todorov E, Jordan MI. 2002. Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination. Nat Neurosci 5:1226–1235. Torres-Oviedo G, Macpherson JM, Ting LH. 2006. Muscle
- synergy organization is robust across a variety of postural perturbations. J Neurophysiol 96:1530–1546.
- Valero-Cuevas FJ, Venkadesan M, Todorov E. 2009. Structured variability of muscle activations supports the minimal intervention principle of motor control. J Neuro-
- physiol 102:59–68. van Beers RJ, Sittig AC, Gon JJ. 1999. Integration of proprioceptive and visual position-information: an experimentally supported model. J Neurophysiol 81:1355–1364.
- Wolpert DM, Flanagan JR. 2001. Motor prediction. Curr Biol 11:R729–732. Yang SC-H, Wolpert DM, Lengyel M. 2016. Theoretical per-
- spectives on active sensing. Curr Opin Behav Sci 11:100–108.

18/01/21 6:00 PM


The Motor Unit and Muscle Action

The Motor Unit Is the Elementary Unit of Motor Control

A Motor Unit Consists of a Motor Neuron and Multiple

Muscle Fibers

## The Properties of Motor Units Vary

Physical Activity Can Alter Motor Unit Properties

Muscle Force Is Controlled by the Recruitment and Discharge Rate of Motor Units

The Input–Output Properties of Motor Neurons Are

Modified by Input From the Brain Stem Muscle Force Depends on the Structure of Muscle

The Sarcomere Is the Basic Organizational Unit of Contractile Proteins

## Noncontractile Elements Provide Essential

Structural Support Contractile Force Depends on Muscle Fiber Activation,

Length, and Velocity Muscle Torque Depends on Musculoskeletal Geometry

Different Movements Require Different Activation Strategies

Contraction Velocity Can Vary in Magnitude and Direction

## Movements Involve the Coordination of Many Muscles

activate the muscles that provide the forces needed to

move in a particular way. This is not a simple task. Not

only must the nervous system decide which muscles to

activate, how much to activate them, and the sequence in which they must be activated in order to move one part of the body, but it must also control the influence of the resultant muscle forces on other body parts and maintain the required posture. This chapter examines how the nervous system controls muscle force and how the force exerted by a limb depends on muscle structure. We also describe

how muscle activation changes to perform different types of movement. The Motor Unit Is the Elementary Unit of

Motor Control

## A Motor Unit Consists of a Motor Neuron and Multiple Muscle Fibers

## The nervous system controls muscle force with signals sent from motor neurons in the spinal cord or brain stem to the muscle fibers. A motor neuron and the

Muscle Work Depends on the Pattern of Activation

Highlights

A

muscle fibers it innervates are known as a motor unit, the basic functional unit by which the nervous system controls movement, a concept proposed by Charles Sherrington in 1925. A typical muscle is controlled by a few hundred motor neurons whose cell bodies are clustered in a motor nucleus in the spinal cord or brain stem. of stairs, typing

ny action—ascending a flight

on a keyboard, even holding a pose—requires

coordinating the movement of body parts. This

is accomplished by the interaction of the nervous system with muscle. The role of the nervous system is to

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 737

The axon of each motor neuron exits the spinal cord through the ventral root or through a cranial nerve in the brain stem and runs in a peripheral nerve to the

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

muscle. When the axon reaches the muscle, it branches

and innervates from a few to several thousand muscle

fibers (Figure 31–1).

Once synaptic input depolarizes the membrane potential of a motor neuron above threshold, the neuron generates an action potential that is propagated

along the axon to its terminals in the muscle. The action potential releases acetylcholine at the neuromuscular synapse, triggering an action potential at the sarcolemma of the muscle fiber (Chapter 12). A muscle fiber has electrical properties similar to those of a large-diameter, unmyelinated axon, and thus, action potentials propagate along the sarcolemma, although more slowly due to the higher capacitance of the fiber resulting from the transverse tubules (see Figure 31–9).

Because the action potentials in all the muscle fibers of a motor unit occur at approximately the same time, they contribute to extracellular currents that sum to generate a field potential near the active muscle fibers. Most muscle contractions involve the activation of many motor units, whose currents sum to produce signals (compound action potentials) that can be detected by

electromyography. The electromyogram (EMG) is typically large and can be easily recorded with electrodes

cord in several ventral roots and peripheral nerves but are

collected into one nerve bundle near the target muscle. In

the figure, motor nucleus A includes all those motor neurons

<!-- image -->

smaller number of motor units. A motor unit comprises a

motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innervates, illustrated here by motor neuron A1. The motor neurons innervating one muscle are usually clustered into an elongated motor nucleus that may extend over one to four segments within the ventral spinal cord. The axons from a motor nucleus exit the spinal

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 738

innervating muscle A; likewise, motor nucleus B includes all the motor neurons that innervate muscle B. The extensively branched dendrites of each motor neuron (not shown in the figure) tend to intermingle with those of motor neurons from other nuclei.

20/01/21 2:39 PM

placed on the skin over the muscle. The timing and

amplitude of EMG activity, therefore, reflect the acti-

vation of muscle fibers by the motor neurons. EMG

signals are useful for studying the neural control of movement and for diagnosing pathology (Chapter 57). Each fiber in most mature vertebrate muscles is innervated by a single motor neuron. The number of muscle fibers innervated by one motor neuron, the

innervation number, varies across muscles. In human skeletal muscles, the innervation number ranges from average values of 5 for an eye muscle to 1,800 for a leg muscle (Table 31–1). Because innervation number denotes the number of muscle fibers within a motor unit, differences in innervation number determine the differences in increments in force produced by activation of different motor units in the same muscle. Thus, the innervation number also indicates the fineness of control of the muscle at low forces; the smaller the innervation number, the finer the control achieved by varying the number of activated motor units. The differences in innervation numbers between motor units in the same muscle can be substantial. For example, motor units of the first dorsal interosseous

Table 31–1 Innervation Numbers in Human Skeletal Muscles muscle of the hand have innervation numbers ranging

Alpha Average

motor Muscle innervation

axons

Muscle fibers number

| Biceps brachii  774  580,000  750  Brachioradialis  333  129,200  410  Cricothyroid  112  18,550  155  Gastrocnemius (medial)  579  1,042,000  1,800  Interossei dorsales (1)  119  40,500  340  Lumbricales (1)  96  10,269  107  Masseter  1,452  929,000  640  Opponens pollicis  133  79,000  595  Platysma  1,096  27,100  25  Posterior cricoarytenoid  140  16,200  116  Rectus lateralis  4,150  22,000  5  Temporalis  1,331  1,247,000  936  Tensor tympani  146  1,100  8  Tibialis anterior  445  272,850  613  Transverse arytenoid  139  34,470  247  Source: Adapted, with permission, from Enoka 2015. © Human  Kinetics, Inc.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 739

Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


from approximately 21 to 1,770. The strongest motor

unit in the hand's first dorsal interosseous muscle can

exert approximately the same force as the average

motor unit in the leg's medial gastrocnemius muscle due to different ranges of innervation numbers in the two muscles. The muscle fibers of a single motor unit are distributed throughout the muscle and intermingle with fibers innervated by other motor neurons. The muscle

fibers innervated by a single motor unit can be distributed across 8% to 75% of the volume in a limb muscle, with 2 to 5 muscle fibers belonging to the same motor unit among 100 muscle fibers. Therefore, the muscle fibers in a cross-section through the middle of an entire muscle are associated with 20 to 50 different motor units. This distribution and even the number of motor units change with age and with some neuromuscular disorders (Chapter 57). For example, muscle fibers that lose their innervation after the death of a motor neuron can be reinnervated by collateral sprouts from neighboring axons. Some muscles comprise discrete compartments that are each innervated by a different primary branch of the muscle nerve. Branches of the median and ulnar

nerves in the forearm, for example, innervate distinct compartments in three multitendon extrinsic hand muscles that enable the fingers to be moved relatively independently. The muscle fibers belonging to each motor unit in such muscles tend to be confined to one compartment. A muscle can therefore consist of several functionally distinct regions. The Properties of Motor Units Vary

The force exerted by a muscle depends not only on

## the number of motor units that are activated during

a contraction but also on three properties of motor

units: contraction speed, maximal force, and fatigability. These properties are assessed by examining the force exerted by individual motor units in response to variations in the number and rate of evoked action potentials. The mechanical response to a single action potential is known as a twitch contraction. The time it takes the twitch to reach its peak force, the contraction time,

is one measure of the contraction speed of the muscle fibers that compose a motor unit. The motor units in a muscle typically exhibit a range of contraction times from slow to fast contracting. The mechanical response to a series of action potentials that produce overlapping twitches is known as a tetanic contraction or tetanus. The force exerted during a tetanic contraction depends on the extent to which the twitches overlap

20/01/21 2:39 PM
placed on the skin over the muscle. The timing and

amplitude of EMG activity, therefore, reflect the acti-

vation of muscle fibers by the motor neurons. EMG

signals are useful for studying the neural control of movement and for diagnosing pathology (Chapter 57). Each fiber in most mature vertebrate muscles is innervated by a single motor neuron. The number of muscle fibers innervated by one motor neuron, the

innervation number, varies across muscles. In human skeletal muscles, the innervation number ranges from average values of 5 for an eye muscle to 1,800 for a leg muscle (Table 31–1). Because innervation number denotes the number of muscle fibers within a motor unit, differences in innervation number determine the differences in increments in force produced by activation of different motor units in the same muscle. Thus, the innervation number also indicates the fineness of control of the muscle at low forces; the smaller the innervation number, the finer the control achieved by varying the number of activated motor units. The differences in innervation numbers between motor units in the same muscle can be substantial. For example, motor units of the first dorsal interosseous

Table 31–1 Innervation Numbers in Human Skeletal Muscles muscle of the hand have innervation numbers ranging

Alpha Average

motor Muscle innervation

axons

Muscle fibers number

| Biceps brachii  774  580,000  750  Brachioradialis  333  129,200  410  Cricothyroid  112  18,550  155  Gastrocnemius (medial)  579  1,042,000  1,800  Interossei dorsales (1)  119  40,500  340  Lumbricales (1)  96  10,269  107  Masseter  1,452  929,000  640  Opponens pollicis  133  79,000  595  Platysma  1,096  27,100  25  Posterior cricoarytenoid  140  16,200  116  Rectus lateralis  4,150  22,000  5  Temporalis  1,331  1,247,000  936  Tensor tympani  146  1,100  8  Tibialis anterior  445  272,850  613  Transverse arytenoid  139  34,470  247  Source: Adapted, with permission, from Enoka 2015. © Human  Kinetics, Inc.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 739

Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


from approximately 21 to 1,770. The strongest motor

unit in the hand's first dorsal interosseous muscle can

exert approximately the same force as the average

motor unit in the leg's medial gastrocnemius muscle due to different ranges of innervation numbers in the two muscles. The muscle fibers of a single motor unit are distributed throughout the muscle and intermingle with fibers innervated by other motor neurons. The muscle

fibers innervated by a single motor unit can be distributed across 8% to 75% of the volume in a limb muscle, with 2 to 5 muscle fibers belonging to the same motor unit among 100 muscle fibers. Therefore, the muscle fibers in a cross-section through the middle of an entire muscle are associated with 20 to 50 different motor units. This distribution and even the number of motor units change with age and with some neuromuscular disorders (Chapter 57). For example, muscle fibers that lose their innervation after the death of a motor neuron can be reinnervated by collateral sprouts from neighboring axons. Some muscles comprise discrete compartments that are each innervated by a different primary branch of the muscle nerve. Branches of the median and ulnar

nerves in the forearm, for example, innervate distinct compartments in three multitendon extrinsic hand muscles that enable the fingers to be moved relatively independently. The muscle fibers belonging to each motor unit in such muscles tend to be confined to one compartment. A muscle can therefore consist of several functionally distinct regions. The Properties of Motor Units Vary

The force exerted by a muscle depends not only on

## the number of motor units that are activated during

a contraction but also on three properties of motor

units: contraction speed, maximal force, and fatigability. These properties are assessed by examining the force exerted by individual motor units in response to variations in the number and rate of evoked action potentials. The mechanical response to a single action potential is known as a twitch contraction. The time it takes the twitch to reach its peak force, the contraction time,

is one measure of the contraction speed of the muscle fibers that compose a motor unit. The motor units in a muscle typically exhibit a range of contraction times from slow to fast contracting. The mechanical response to a series of action potentials that produce overlapping twitches is known as a tetanic contraction or tetanus. The force exerted during a tetanic contraction depends on the extent to which the twitches overlap

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

and summate (ie, the force varies with the contraction

time of the motor unit and the rate at which the action

potentials are evoked). At lower rates of stimulation,

the ripples in the tetanus denote the peaks of individual twitches (Figure 31–2A). The peak force achieved during a tetanic contraction varies as a sigmoidal function of action potential rate, with the shape of the curve depending on the contraction time of the motor unit (Figure 31–2B). Maximal force is reached at lower Fast twitch A

100 mN

action potential rates for slow-contracting motor units

than the rates needed to achieve maximal force in fast-

contracting units.

The functional properties of motor units vary across the population and between muscles. At one end of the distribution, motor units have long twitch contraction

Slow twitch times and produce small forces, but are less fatigable. At the other end of the distribution, motor units have short contraction times, produce large forces, and are

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

100 Hz




200 ms

Fast

<!-- image -->

Slow

0 20 40 60 80 100

Figure 31–2 The force exerted by a motor unit varies with

the rate at which its neuron generates action potentials.

Fast

0 20 40 60 80 100

two sets of traces. (Adapted, with permission, from Botterman,

Iwamoto, and Gonyea 1986; adapted from Fuglevand,

Macefield, and Bigland-Ritchie 1999; and Macefield, Fuglevand,


<!-- image -->

A. Traces show the forces exerted by fast- and slow-contracting

motor units in response to a single action potential (top trace) and a series of action potentials (set of four traces below). The

time to the peak twitch force, or contraction time, is briefer in the faster unit. The rates of the action potentials used to evoke the tetanic contractions range from 17 to 100 Hz in the slowcontracting unit to 46 to 100 Hz in the fast-contracting unit. The peak tetanic force evoked by 100-Hz stimulation is greater for the fast-contracting unit. Note the different force scales for the

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 740

and Bigland-Ritchie 1996.) B. Relation between peak force and the rate of action potentials for fast- and slow-contracting motor units. The absolute force (left plot) is greater for the fast-contracting motor unit at

all frequencies. At lower stimulus rates (right plot), the force evoked in the slow-contracting motor unit (longer contraction time) sums to a greater relative force (percent of peak force) than in the fast-contracting motor unit (shorter contraction time).

Peak force (% maximum)

5 mN

100 Hz




400 ms

20/01/21 2:39 PM

A Twitch torques


<!-- image -->

140 160

Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


of contractile speed. Histochemical stains for myosin

ATPase can identify two types of muscle fibers: type I

(low levels of myosin ATPase) and type II (high lev-

180 els of myosin ATPase). Slow-contracting motor units contain type I muscle fibers, and fast-contracting units include type II fibers. The type II fibers can be further classified as being less fatigable (type IIa) or more fatigable (type IIb, IIx, or IId), due to the association between myosin ATPase content and the relative abundance of oxidative enzymes. Another commonly used scheme distinguishes muscle fibers on the basis of genetically defined isoforms of the myosin heavy chain (MHC). Muscle fibers in slow-contracting motor units express MHC-I, those in the less fatigable fastcontracting units express MHC-IIA, and those in the more fatigable fast-contracting units express MHC-IIX. In actuality, the contractile properties of single muscle fibers are less distinct than the two classifica -tion schemes suggest (Figure 31–4). In addition to the

<!-- image -->

permission, from Van Cutsem et al. 1997. © Canadian Science

Publishing.) A. Distribution of twitch torques for 528 motor units in the tibialis anterior muscle obtained from 10 subjects. B. Distribution of twitch contraction times for 528 motor units

in the tibialis anterior muscle.

more fatigable. The order in which motor units are recruited during a voluntary contraction begins with

the slow-contracting, low-force units and proceeds up

to the fast-contracting, high-force units. As observed by Jacques Duchateau and colleagues, most motor units in humans produce low forces and have intermediate contraction times (Figure 31–3). The range of contractile properties exhibited by motor units is partly attributable to differences in the structural specializations and metabolic properties of variability in the contractile properties of each type of muscle fiber (MHC-I, -IIA, or -IIX), some muscle fibers co-express more than one MHC isoform. Such hybrid muscle fibers exhibit contractile properties that are intermediate between the muscle fibers that compose a


<!-- image -->

muscle fibers. One commonly used scheme to characterize muscle fibers is based on their reactivity to histochemical assays for the enzyme myosin adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), which is used as an index

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 741

0.04

ments of single muscle fibers from the vastus lateralis muscle

with different types of myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoforms. Two types of hybrid fibers (I-IIA and IIA-IIX) contain isoforms of both types of MHCs. Power is calculated as the product of peak tetanic force (P o ) and maximal shortening velocity (segment length per second [L/s]). (Adapted, with permission, from Bottinelli et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 The Physiological Society.)

20/01/21 2:39 PM

0.05


Part V / Movement

single isoform. The relative proportion of hybrid fibers

in a muscle increases with age. As with the distribu-

tion of contractile properties across motor units (Figure

31–3), the distribution across individual muscle fibers is also continuous, from slow to fast contracting and from least to most powerful (Figure 31–4). Physical Activity Can Alter Motor Unit Properties

Alterations in habitual levels of physical activity can

## influence the three contractile properties of motor units

(contraction speed, maximal force, and fatigability). A

decrease in muscle activity, such as occurs with aging, bed rest, limb immobilization, or space flight, reduces the maximal capabilities of all three properties. The effects of increased physical activity vary with the intensity and duration of the activity. Brief sets of strong contractions performed a few times each week can increase motor unit force (strength training); brief sets of rapid contractions performed a few times each week can increase motor unit discharge rate (power training); and prolonged periods of weaker contractions can reduce motor unit fatigability (endurance training). Changes in the contractile properties of motor units involve adaptations in the structural specializations and biochemical properties of muscle fibers. The improve-

ment in contraction speed caused by power training, for example, is associated with an increase in the maximal shortening velocity of a muscle fiber caused by an increase in the quantity of myosin ATPase in the fiber. Similarly, the increase in maximal force is associated with the enlarged size and increased intrinsic force capacity of the muscle fibers produced by an increase in the number and density of the contractile proteins. In contrast, decreases in the fatigability of a muscle fiber can be caused by many different adaptations, such as increases in capillary density, number of mito-

chondria, efficiency of the processes involved in activating the contractile proteins (excitation-contraction coupling), and oxidative capacity of the muscle fibers. Although the adaptive capabilities of muscle fibers decline with age, the muscles remain responsive to exercise even at 90 years of age. Despite the efficacy of strength, power, and endurance training in altering the contractile properties of muscle fibers, these training regimens have little effect

on the composition of a muscle's fibers. Although several weeks of exercise can change the relative proportion of type IIA and IIX fibers, it produces no change in the proportion of type I fibers. All fiber types adapt in response to exercise, although to varying extents depending on the type of exercise. For example, strength training of leg muscles for 2 to 3 months

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 742

can increase the cross-sectional area of type I fibers by

0% to 20% and of type II fibers by 20% to 60%, increase

the proportion of type IIa fibers by approximately

10%, and decrease the proportion of type IIx fibers by a similar amount. Furthermore, endurance training may increase the enzyme activities of oxidative metabolic pathways without noticeable changes in the proportions of type I and type II fibers, but the relative proportions of type IIa and IIx fibers do change as a function of the duration of each exercise session. Conversely, although several weeks of bed rest or limb immobilization do not change the proportions of fiber types in a muscle, they do decrease the size and intrinsic force capacity of muscle fibers. Adaptations in fiber type properties and proportions in turn alter the distribution of contractile properties in muscle fibers (Figure 31–4) and motor units (Figure 31–3). Although physical activity has little influence on the proportion of type I fibers in a muscle, more substantial interventions can have an effect. Space flight,

for example, exposes muscles to a sustained decrease in gravity that reduces the proportion of type I fibers in some leg muscles and decreases contractile properties. Similarly, surgically changing the nerve that innervates a muscle alters the pattern of activation and eventually causes the muscle to exhibit properties similar to those of the muscle that was originally innervated by the transplanted nerve. Connecting a nerve that originally innervated a rapidly contracting leg muscle to a slowly contracting leg muscle, for example, will cause the slower muscle to become more like a faster muscle. In contrast, a history of performing powerful contractions with leg muscles is associated with a modest reduction in the proportion of type I fibers, a marked increase in the proportion of type IIx fibers, and a huge increase in the power that can be produced by the type IIa and IIx fibers. Muscle Force Is Controlled by the Recruitment and Discharge Rate of Motor Units

## The force exerted by a muscle during a contraction depends on the number of motor units that are activated and the rate at which each of the active motor

neurons discharges action potentials. Force is increased during a muscle contraction by the activation of additional motor units, which are recruited progressively from the weakest to the strongest (Figure 31–5). A motor unit's recruitment threshold is the force during the contraction at which the motor unit is activated. Muscle force decreases gradually by terminating the activity of motor units in the reverse order from strongest to weakest.

20/01/21 2:39 PM

A Action potentials in two motor units

Unit 1

Unit 2

Muscle

## action potentials

<!-- image -->

Unit 1

## Average

force Unit 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 743


Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


The order in which motor units are recruited is

highly correlated with several indices of motor unit

size, including the size of the motor neuron cell bod-

0.5 mV 2.5 N ies, the diameter and conduction velocity of the axons, and the amount of force that the muscle fibers can exert. Because individual sources of synaptic input are broadly distributed across most neurons in a motor nucleus, the orderly recruitment of motor neurons is not accomplished by the sequential activation of different sets of synaptic inputs that target specific motor neurons. Rather, recruitment order is determined by intrinsic differences in the responsiveness of individual motor neurons to relatively uniform synaptic input. One of these factors is the anatomical size of a neuron's soma and dendrites. Smaller neurons have a higher input resistance (R in ) to current and, due

2.5 mN 10 mN to Ohm's law (∆Vm Vm = Is Isyn × R in ), experience a greater change in membrane potential (∆Vm Vm ) in response to a given synaptic current (Is Isyn ). Consequently, increases in the net excitatory input to a motor nucleus cause the levels of depolarization to reach threshold in an ascending order of motor neuron size: Contraction force is increased by recruiting the smallest motor neuron first and the largest motor neuron last (Figure 31–6). This effect is known as the size principle of motor neuron recruitment, a concept enunciated by Elwood Henneman in 1957. The size principle has two important consequences for the control of movement by the nervous system. First, the sequence of motor neuron recruitment is

Figure 31–5 (Left) Motor units that exert low forces are determined by the properties of the spinal neurons and not by supraspinal regions of the nervous system. This means that the brain cannot selectively activate specific motor units. Second, the axons arising from small motor neurons are thinner than those associated with

recruited before those that exert greater forces. (Adapted, with

permission, from Desmedt and Godaux 1977; Milner-Brown,

Stein, and Yemm 1973. Copyright © 1973 The Physiological Society.) A. Action potentials in two motor units were recorded concurrently with a single intramuscular electrode while the subject gradually increased muscle force. Motor unit 1 began discharg-

ing action potentials near the beginning of the voluntary contraction, and its discharge rate increased during the contraction. Motor unit 2 began discharging action potentials near the end of the contraction. B. Average twitch forces for motor units 1 and 2 as extracted with an averaging procedure during the voluntary contraction. C. The plot shows the net muscle forces at which 64 motor

- units in a hand muscle of one person were recruited (recruitment threshold) during a voluntary contraction relative to the
- twitch forces of the individual motor units.

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

Figure 31–6 The size principle of

motor neuron recruitment.  Two motor

neurons of different sizes have the same

resting membrane potential (Vr Vr ) and receive the same excitatory synaptic current (Is Isyn ) from a spinal interneuron. Because the small motor neuron has a smaller surface area, it has fewer parallel ion channels and therefore a higher input resistance (R high ). According to Ohm's law (V = IR), Is Isyn in the small neuron produces a large excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) that reaches threshold, resulting in the discharge of an action potential. However, the axon of the small motor neuron has a small diameter and thus conducts the action potential at a relatively low velocity (Vs Vslow ) and to fewer muscle fibers. In contrast, the large motor neuron has a larger surface area, which results in a lower transmembrane resist -ance (Rl Rlow ) and a smaller EPSP that does not reach threshold in response to Is Isyn ; however, when synaptic input does reach threshold, the action potential is conducted relatively rapidly (Vf Vfast ) (Chapter 9).

large motor neurons and innervate fewer muscle fibers.

Spinal

interneuron

<!-- image -->

Because the number of muscle fibers innervated by a

motor neuron is a key determinant of motor unit force,

motor units are activated in order of increasing strength, so the earliest recruited motor units are the weakest ones. As suggested by Edgar Adrian in the 1920s, the muscle force at which the last motor unit in a motor nucleus is recruited varies between muscles. In some

Figure 31–7 Muscle force can be adjusted by varying the number of active motor units and their discharge rate. Each hand muscles, all the motor units have been recruited when the force reaches approximately 60% of maximum Large-diameter motor neuron Threshold EPSP

during a slow muscle contraction. In the biceps brachii,

deltoid, and tibialis anterior muscles, recruitment con-

tinues up to approximately 85% of the maximal force.

Beyond the upper limit of motor unit recruitment, changes in muscle force depend solely on variations in the rate at which motor neurons generate action potentials. Over most of the operating range of a muscle, the force it exerts depends on concurrent changes in discharge rate and the number of active motor units (Figure 31–7). Except at low forces, however, variation in 40

line shows the discharge rate (pulses per second [pps]) for a

single motor unit in a hand muscle over a range of finger forces (maximal voluntary contraction [MVC]). The finger force was produced by the action of a single hand muscle. The leftmost point of each line indicates the threshold force at which the motor unit is recruited, whereas the rightmost point corresponds to the peak force at which the motor unit could be identified. The range of discharge rates was often less for motor units with lower recruitment thresholds. Increases in finger force were produced by concurrent increases in discharge rate and the number of activated motor units. (Adapted, with permission, from Moritz et al. 2005.)

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 744

<!-- image -->

20/01/21 2:39 PM


discharge rate has a greater influence on muscle force

than does changes in the number of active motor units.

The order in which motor units are recruited does

not change with contraction speed. Due to the time involved in excitation-contraction coupling, faster

contractions require the action potential for each motor unit to be generated earlier than during a slow contraction. As a result of this adjustment, the upper limit of motor unit recruitment during the fastest muscle contractions is approximately 40% of maximum. Consequently, it is possible to manipulate the rate at which motor units are recruited by varying contraction speed. The Input–Output Properties of Motor Neurons Are Modified by Input From the Brain Stem

## The discharge rate of motor neurons depends on the magnitude of the depolarization generated by excitatory inputs and the intrinsic membrane properties of

the motor neurons in the spinal cord. These properties can be profoundly modified by input from monoaminergic neurons in the brain stem (Chapter 40). In the absence of this input, the dendrites of motor neurons passively transmit synaptic current to the cell body, resulting in a modest depolarization that immediately ceases when the input stops. Under these conditions, the relation between input current and discharge rate is linear over a wide range. The input–output relation becomes nonlinear, however, when the monoamines serotonin and norepinephrine induce a huge increase in conductance by

activating L-type Ca 2+ channels that are located on the dendrites of the motor neurons. The resulting inward Ca 2+ currents can enhance synaptic currents by threeto five-fold (Figure 31–8). In an active motor neuron, this augmented current can sustain an elevated discharge rate after a brief depolarizing input has ended, a behavior known as self-sustained firing. A subsequent brief inhibitory input, such as from a spinal reflex pathway, can terminate such self-sustained firing. Because the properties of motor neurons are strongly influenced by monoamines, the excitability of the pool of motor neurons innervating a single muscle

is partly under control of the brain stem. In the awake state, moderate levels of monoaminergic input to the motor neurons of slowly contracting motor units promote self-sustained firing. This is probably the source of the sustained force exerted by slower motor units to maintain posture (Chapter 36). Conversely, the withdrawal of monoaminergic drive during sleep decreases excitability and helps ensure a relaxed motor state. Thus, monoaminergic input from the brain stem can adjust the gain of the motor unit pool to meet

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 745

Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


the demands of different tasks. This flexibility does

not compromise the size principle of orderly recruit-

ment because the threshold for activation of the per-

sistent inward currents is lowest in the motor neurons of slower contracting motor units, which are the first recruited even in the absence of monoamines. Muscle Force Depends on the Structure

of Muscle

## Muscle force depends not only on the amount of motor neuron activity but also on the arrangement of the fib-

ers in the muscle. Because movement involves the

controlled variation of muscle force, the nervous system must take into account the structure of muscle to achieve specific movements. The Sarcomere Is the Basic Organizational Unit of Contractile Proteins

## Individual muscles contain thousands of fibers that vary from 1 to 50 mm in length and from 10 to 60 μm in

diameter. The variation in fiber dimensions reflects dif

-

ferences in the quantity of contractile protein. Despite this quantitative variation, the organization of contractile proteins is similar in all muscle fibers. The proteins are arranged in repeating sets of thick and thin filaments, each set known as a sarcomere (Figure 31–9). The in vivo length of a sarcomere, which is bounded by Z disks, ranges from 1.5 to 3.5 μm within and across muscles. Sarcomeres are arranged in series to form a myofibril, and the myofibrils are aligned in parallel to form a muscle fiber (myocyte). The force that each sarcomere can generate arises from the interaction of the contractile thick and thin fil -aments. The thick filament consists of several hundred

myosin molecules arranged in a structured sequence. Each myosin molecule comprises paired coiled-coil domains that terminate in a pair of globular heads. The myosin molecules in the two halves of a thick filament point in opposite directions and are progressively displaced so that the heads, which extend away from the filament, protrude around the thick filament (Figure 31–9C). The thick filament is anchored in the middle of the sarcomere by the protein titin, which connects each end of the thick filament with neighboring strands of actin in the thin filament and with the Z-disc. To maxi -mize the interaction between the globular heads of myosin and the thin filaments, six thin filaments surround each thick filament. The primary components of the thin filament are two helical strands of fibrous F-actin, each of which

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

A

Monoaminergic input

Low

Moderate

<!-- image -->

et al. 2009. Copyright © 2009 International Federation of







rate during the input and sustains a lesser discharge rate after

the input ceases (lower record). A brief inhibitory input will

return the neuron to its resting state.

, B. High levels of monoaminergic input to a motor neuron give rise to a persistent inward current in response to injected current, resulting in a much greater discharge rate for a given amount of current.

Clinical Neurophysiology; Part B, data from CJ Heckman; Part C adapted, with permission, from Erim et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.) A. Membrane currents and potentials in spinal motor neurons of adult cats that were either deeply anesthetized (low monoaminergic drive) or decerebrate (moderate monoaminergic

drive). When monoaminergic input is absent or low, a brief excitatory input produces an equally brief synaptic current during voltage clamp (upper record). This current is not sufficient to bring the membrane potential of the neuron to threshold for generating action potentials in the unclamped condition (lower record). The same brief excitatory input during moderate levels of monoaminergic input activates a persistent inward current in the dendrites, which amplifies the excitatory synaptic current and decays slowly following cessation of synaptic input (upper record). This persistent inward current causes a high discharge contains approximately 200 actin monomers. Superimposed on F-actin are tropomyosin and troponin,

proteins that control the interaction between actin and

myosin. Tropomyosin consists of two coiled strands that lie in the groove of the F-actin helix; troponin is a small molecular complex that is attached to tropomyosin at regular intervals (Figure 31–9C).

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 746

- C. The blue trace represents the force exerted by the dorsiflexor muscle during a contraction that gradually increased to 80% of maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVC) force in a human

subject. Each of the four pink traces indicates the change in the rate at which a single motor unit discharged action potentials during the contraction. The leftmost point (start) of each of these four traces shows the time when the motor unit was recruited, and the rightmost point (end) denotes the time at which the motor neuron stopped discharging action potentials. The rapid increase in discharge rate during the increase in muscle force is similar to the change in rate observed in the presence of moderate levels of monoaminergic input (see part B). The thin filaments are anchored to the Z disk at each end of the sarcomere, whereas the thick filaments

occupy the middle of the sarcomere (Figure 31–9B).

This organization accounts for the alternating light and dark bands of striated muscle. The light band contains only thin filaments, whereas the dark band contains both thick and thin filaments. When a muscle is

20/01/21 2:39 PM

Fo

rce (% MVC)

activated, the width of the light band decreases but the

width of the dark band does not change, suggesting

that the thick and thin filaments slide relative to one

another during a contraction. This led to the sliding filament hypothesis of muscle contraction proposed by A. F. Huxley and H. E. Huxley in the 1950s. The sliding of the thick and thin filaments is triggered by the release of Ca 2+ from within the sarcoplasm of a muscle fiber in response to an action potential that Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


extension of titin adds significantly to the sarcomere

force. The force produced by titin during the stretch

of an activated sarcomere is augmented by its abil-

ity to increase stiffness, which is accomplished when titin binds Ca 2+ and then attaches at specific locations on actin to reduce the length that it can be stretched. The force produced by activated sarcomeres therefore depends on the interactions of three filaments (actin, myosin, and titin). Noncontractile Elements Provide Essential Structural Support

-

## 2+ Structural elements of the muscle fiber maintain the alignment of the contractile proteins within the fiber and facilitate the transmission of force from the sar

diffuses comeres to the skeleton. A network of proteins (nebulin, titin) maintains the orientation of the thick and thin filaments within the sarcomere, whereas other proteins (desmin, skelemins) constrain the lateral alignment of the myofibrils (Figure 31–9B). These proteins contribute to the elasticity of muscle and maintain the appropriate alignment of cellular structures when the muscle acts against an external load. Although some of the force generated by the cross bridges is transmitted along the sarcomeres in series, most of it travels laterally from the thin filaments to

travels along the fiber's membrane, the sarcolemma. Varying the amount of Ca 2+ in the sarcoplasm controls the interaction between the thick and thin filaments. The Ca 2+ concentration in the sarcoplasm is kept low under resting conditions by active pumping of Ca into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a network of longitudinal tubules and chambers of smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Calcium is stored in the terminal cisternae, which are located next to intracellular extensions of the sarcolemma known as transverse tubules (T-tubules). The transverse tubules, terminal cisternae, and sarcoplasmic reticulum constitute an activation system that transforms an action potential into the sliding of the thick and thin filaments (Figure 31–9A). As an action potential propagates along the sarcolemma, it invades the transverse tubules and causes the rapid release of Ca 2+ from the terminal cisternae into

the sarcoplasm. Once in the sarcoplasm, Ca 2+ among the filaments and binds reversibly to troponin, which results in the displacement of the troponin– tropomyosin complex and enables the sliding of the thick and thin filaments. Because a single action potential does not release enough Ca 2+ to bind all available tro ponin sites in skeletal muscle, the strength of a contraction increases with the action potential rate. The sliding of the filaments depends on mechanical work performed by the globular heads of myosin, work that uses chemical energy contained in adeno-

sine triphosphate (ATP). The actions of the myosin heads are regulated by the cross-bridge cycle, a sequence of detachment, activation, and attachment (Figure 31–10). In each cycle, a globular head undergoes a displacement of 5 to 10 nm. Contractile activity continues as long as Ca 2+ and ATP are present in the cytoplasm in sufficient amounts. Once the contractile proteins have been activated by the release of Ca 2+ , sarcomere length may increase, remain the same, or decrease depending on the magni-

tude of the load against which the muscle is acting. The force generated by an activated sarcomere when its length does not change or decreases can be explained by the cross-bridge cycle involving the thick and thin filaments. When the length of the activated sarcomere increases, however, the force developed by the

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 747

-an extracellular matrix that surrounds each muscle fiber, through a group of transmembrane and membraneassociated proteins called a costamere (see inset for Figure 31–9B). The lateral transmission of force follows two pathways through the costamere, one through a dystrophin–glycoprotein complex and the other through vinculin and members of the integrin family. Mutations of genes that encode components of the dystrophin–glycoprotein complex cause muscular dystrophies in humans, which are associated with substantial decreases in muscle force. Contractile Force Depends on Muscle Fiber Activation, Length, and Velocity

## The force that a muscle fiber can exert depends on the number of cross bridges formed and the force

produced by each cross bridge. These two factors are

influenced by the Ca 2+ concentration in the sarcoplasm, the amount of overlap between the thick and thin filaments, and the velocity with which the thick and thin filaments slide past one another. The influx of Ca 2+ that activates formation of the cross bridges is transitory because continuous pump activity quickly returns Ca 2+ to the sarcoplasmic reticu-

lum. The release and reuptake of Ca 2+ in response to a single action potential occurs so quickly that only some

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 748

Basal lamina

Fibronectin

Vinculin

20/01/21 2:39 PM
Part V / Movement

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 748

Basal lamina

Fibronectin

Vinculin

20/01/21 2:39 PM

of the potential cross bridges are formed. This explains

why the peak force of a twitch is less than the maxi-

mal force of the muscle fiber (see Figure 31–2A). Maxi-

mal force can be achieved only with a series of action potentials that sustains the Ca 2+ concentration in the sarcoplasm, thus maximizing cross bridge formation. Although Ca 2+ activates formation of the cross bridges, cross bridges can be formed only when the thick and thin filaments overlap. This overlap varies

as the filaments slide relative to one another (Figure 31–11A). The amount of overlap between actin and myosin is optimal at an intermediate sarcomere length (L o ), and the relative force is maximal. Increases in sarcomere length reduce the overlap between actin and myosin and the force that can be developed. Decreases in sarcomere length cause the thin filaments to overlap, reducing the number of binding sites available to the myosin heads. Although many muscles operate over a narrow range of sarcomere lengths (approximately 94 ± 13% L o , mean ± standard deviation), among muscles, there is considerable diversity in sarcomere lengths during movement. Because structures that connect the contractile proteins to the skeleton also influence the force that a mus cle can exert, muscle force increases with length over its Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


the length of the muscle fiber is held fixed (isometric

contraction). When the length of the muscle fiber is not

kept constant, the direction and rate of change in sar-

comere length depend on the amount of muscle fiber force relative to the magnitude of the load against which the fiber acts. Sarcomere length decreases when the muscle fiber force exceeds the load (shortening contraction) but increases when the force is less than the load (lengthening contraction). The maximal force that a muscle fiber can exert decreases as shortening velocity increases but increases as lengthening velocity increases (Figure 31–11B). The maximal rate at which a muscle fiber can shorten is limited by the peak rate at which cross bridges can form. The variation in fiber force as con-

-traction velocity changes is largely caused by differences in the average force exerted by each cross bridge. For example, the decrease in force during a shortening contraction is attributable to a reduction in crossbridge displacement during each power stroke and the failure of some myosin heads to find attachment sites. Conversely, the increase in force during a lengthening contraction reflects the stretching of incompletely activated sarcomeres, the more rapid reattachment of cross bridges after they have been pulled apart, and the attachment of Ca 2+ to titin. The rate of cross-bridge cycling depends not only on contraction velocity but also on the preceding activity of the muscle. For example, the rate of cross-bridge cycling

operating range. This property enables muscle to function like a spring and to resist changes in length. Muscle stiffness, which corresponds to the slope of the relation between muscle force and muscle length (N/m), depends on the structure of the muscle. A stiffer muscle, similar to a stronger spring, is more resistant to changes in length. Once activated, cross bridges perform work and cause the thick and thin filaments to slide relative to one another. Due to the elasticity of intracellular cytoskel-

etal proteins and the extracellular matrix, sarcomeres will shorten when the cross bridges are activated and increases after a brief isometric contraction. When a muscle is stretched while in this state, such as would occur during a postural disturbance, muscle stiffness is enhanced, and the muscle is more effective at resisting the change in length. This property is known as short-range stiffness. Conversely, the cross-bridge cycling rate decreases after shortening contractions, and the muscle does not exhibit short-range stiffness.

Figure 31–9 (Opposite) The sarcomere is the basic

functional unit of muscle. (Adapted from Bloom and

Fawcett 1975.)

## A. This section of a muscle fiber shows its anatomical organization. Several myofibrils lie side by side in a fiber, and each myofibril is made up of sarcomeres arranged end to end and

separated by Z disks (see part B). The myofibrils are surrounded by an activation system (the transverse tubules, terminal cisternae, and sarcoplasmic reticulum) that initiates muscle contraction. B. Sarcomeres are connected to one another and to the muscle fiber membrane by the cytoskeletal lattice. The cytoskeleton influences the length of the contractile elements, the thick and

thin filaments (see part C). It maintains the alignment of these filaments within a sarcomere, connects adjacent myofibrils,

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 749

and transmits force to the extracellular matrix of connective

tissue through costameres. One consequence of this organiza-

tion is that the force generated by the contractile elements in

a sarcomere can be transmitted along and across sarcomeres (through desmin and skelemin), within and between sarcomeres (through nebulin and titin), and to the sarcolemma through the costameres. The Z disk is a focal point for many of these connections. C. The thick and thin filaments comprise different contractile proteins. The thin filament includes polymerized actin along with the regulatory proteins tropomyosin and troponin. The

thick filament is an array of myosin molecules; each molecule includes a stem that terminates in a pair of globular heads. The protein titin maintains the position of each thick filament in the middle of the sarcomere.

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement


Troponin Tropomyosin Thin

<!-- image -->

Ca

2+

. The cycle begins at the top (step 1) with the binding of

adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to the myosin head. The myosin head detaches from actin (step 2), ATP is cleaved to phosphate (P i ) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (step 3), and the myosin becomes weakly bound to actin (step 4). The binding of Ca troponin causes tropomyosin to slide over actin and enables the Muscle Torque Depends on

Musculoskeletal Geometry

## The anatomy of a muscle has a pronounced effect on its force capacity, range of motion, and shortening

velocity. The anatomical features that influence func-

tion include the arrangement of the sarcomeres in

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 750

the cross-bridge cycle (step 6). Each cross-bridge exerts a force

2+ to of approximately 2 pN during a structural change (step 7) and the release of ADP (step 8). (·, strong binding; ∼, weak binding; M f , cross-bridge force of myosin; and M f
* , force-bearing state of myosin.) (Adapted, with permission, from Gordon, Regnier, and Homsher 2001.) each muscle fiber, the organization of the muscle fib-

ers within the muscle, and the location of the mus

-

cle's attachments on the skeleton. These features vary

widely among muscles. At the level of a single muscle fiber, the number of sarcomeres in series and in parallel can vary. The number of sarcomeres in series determines the length

20/01/21 2:39 PM

A Change in length


<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

o

A. At an intermediate sarcomere length, L

, the amount of

overlap between actin and myosin is optimal and the relative force is maximal. When the sarcomere is stretched beyond the

length at which the thick and thin filaments overlap (length a), cross bridges cannot form and no force is exerted. As sarcomere length decreases and the overlap of the thick and thin filaments increases (between lengths a and b), the force increases because the number of cross bridges increases. With further reductions in length (between lengths c and e), the extreme overlap of the thin filaments with each other occludes potential attachment sites and the force decreases. B. Contractile force varies with the rate of change in sarcomere length. Relative to the force that a sarcomere can exert during

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 751


Vmax Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


Z disk

an isometric contraction (zero velocity), the peak force declines

as the rate of shortening increases. Muscle force reaches a

minimum at the maximal shortening velocity (Vm

Vmax

). In contrast,

when the sarcomere is lengthened while being activated, the peak force increases to values greater than those during an isometric contraction. Shortening causes the myosin heads to spend more time near the end of their power stroke, where they produce less contractile force, and more time detaching, recocking, and reattaching, during which they produce no force. When the muscle is actively lengthened, the myosin heads spend more time stretched beyond their angle of attachment and little time unattached because they do not need to be recocked after being pulled away from the actin in this manner. Titin also contributes significantly to sarcomere force during lengthening contractions.

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

Figure 31–12 Five common

arrangements of tendon and

muscle. The fundamental distinc Tendon Muscle fascicle

tion between these arrangements is whether or not the muscle fas -cicles are aligned with the line of pull of the muscles. The fascicles in muscles A and B are parallel to the line of pull (longitudinal axis of the muscle), whereas the fas -cicles in muscles C, D, and E are rotated away from the line of pull. The magnitude of this rotation is expressed as the pennation angle. (Reproduced, with permission, from Alexander and Ker 1990.)

<!-- image -->

of the myofibril and thus the length of the muscle fiber.

Because one sarcomere can shorten by a certain length

with a given maximal velocity, both the range of motion

and the maximal shortening velocity of a muscle fiber are proportional to the number of sarcomeres in series. The force that a myofibril can exert is equal to the average sarcomere force and is not influenced by the number of sarcomeres in series. Rather, the force capacity of a fiber depends on the number of sarcomeres in parallel and hence on the diameter or cross-sectional area of the fiber. At the level of the muscle, the functional attributes of the fibers are modified by the orientation of the fascicles (bundles of muscle fibers) to the line of pull of the muscle and the length of the fiber relative to the muscle length. In most muscles, the fascicles are not parallel to the line of pull but fan out in feather-like (pennate) arrangements (Figure 31–12). The relative orientation, or pennation angle of the fascicles, ranges from close to 0° (biceps brachii, sartorius) to approximately 30° (soleus). Because more fib-

ers can fit into a given volume as the pennation angle increases, muscles with large pennation angles typically have more fascicles in parallel and hence large cross-sectional areas when measured perpendicular to the long axis of individual muscle fibers. Given the linear relation between cross-sectional area (quantity

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 752

Greater range of

motion and shortening

More force per volume

of contractile proteins in parallel) and maximal force

(∼22.5 N · cm

–2

), these muscles are capable of a greater

maximal force. However, the fibers in pennate muscles

are generally short and have a lesser maximal shortening velocity than those in nonpennate muscles. The functional consequences of this anatomical arrangement can be seen by comparing the contractile properties of two muscles with different numbers of

fibers and fiber lengths. If the two muscles have identical fiber lengths but one has twice as many fibers, the range of motion of the two muscles will be similar because it is a function of fiber length, but the maximal force capacity will vary in proportion to the number of muscle fibers. If the two muscles have identical numbers of fibers but the fibers in one muscle are twice as long, the muscle with the longer fibers will have a greater range of motion and a greater maximal shortening velocity, even though the two muscles have a similar force capacity. Because of this effect, the muscle with longer fibers is able to exert more force and produce more power (the product of force and velocity) at a given absolute shortening velocity (Figure 31–13). Muscle fiber lengths and cross-sectional areas vary substantially throughout the human body, which suggests that the contractile properties of individual

muscles also differ markedly (Table 31–2). In the leg,

20/01/21 2:39 PM

A

A

Different number of bers B Different ber lengths

Force versus muscle length Force versus muscle length

More

## 100

sion, from Lieber and Fridén 2000. Copyright © 2000

Force versus muscle velocity

150 200

The muscle with longer fibers (approximately twice as long as

John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.) A. Muscle force at various muscle lengths for two muscles with similar fiber lengths but different numbers of muscle fibers (different cross-sectional area). The muscle with twice as

<!-- image -->

- those of the other muscle) has an increased range of motion (left plot). It also has a greater maximal shortening velocity and exerts greater force at a given absolute velocity (right plot).

many fibers exerts greater force. Table 31–2 Average Architectural Properties for Some Human Skeletal Leg Muscles

Muscle Fiber length (cm)

Muscle Mass (g) length (cm)

Pennation

angle (°)

Cross-sectional

area (cm


)

| Thigh  Sartorius  78  45  40  1  2  Rectus femoris  111  36  8  14  14  Vastus lateralis  376  27  10  18  35  Vastus intermedius  172  41  10  5  17  Vastus medialis  239  44  10  30  21  Gracilis  53  29  23  8  2  Adductor longus  75  22  11  7  7  Adductor brevis  55  15  10  6  5  Adductor magnus  325  38  14  16  21  Biceps femoris (long)  113  35  10  12  11  Biceps femoris (short)  60  22  11  12  5  Semitendinosus  100  30  19  13  5  Semimembranosus  134  29  7  15  18  Lower leg  Tibialis anterior  80  26  7  10  11  Extensor hallucis longus  21  24  7  9  3  Extensor digitorum longus  41  29  7  11  6  Peroneus longus  58  27  5  14  10  Peroneus brevis  24  24  5  11  5  Gastrocnemius (medial)  113  27  5  10  21  Gastrocnemius (lateral)  62  22  6  12  10  Soleus  276  41  4  28  52  Flexor hallucis longus  39  27  5  17  7  Flexor digitorum longus  20  27  4  14  4  Tibialis posterior  58  31  4  14  14  Source: Adapted, with permission, from Ward et al. 2009.   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 753

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

for example, pennation angle ranges from 1° (sarto-

rius) to 30° (vastus medialis), fiber length ranges from

4 mm (soleus) to 40 mm (sartorius), and cross-sectional relative to the joint. If the force exerted by a muscle remains relatively constant throughout the joint's range of motion, muscle torque varies in direct proportion to

(soleus). the change in the moment arm. For many muscles, the moment arm is maximal in the middle of the range of motion, which usually corresponds to the position of maximal muscle force and hence greatest muscle torque. Different Movements Require Different Activation Strategies

## The human body has approximately 600 muscles, each with a distinct torque profile about one or more joints.

To perform a desired movement, the nervous system

-must activate an appropriate combination of muscles with adequate intensity and timing of activity. The activation must be appropriate for the contractile properties and musculoskeletal geometry of many muscles, as well as the mechanical interactions between body segments. As a result of these demands, activation strategies differ with the details of the movement. Contraction Velocity Can Vary in Magnitude and Direction

area ranges from 2 cm 2 (sartorius) to 52 cm 2 In addition, the fact that muscle fiber length is usually less than muscle length indicates that muscle fibers are connected serially within a muscle. Functionally coupled muscles tend to have complementary combinations of these properties. For example, the three vasti muscles have similar muscle fiber lengths (10 cm), but they differ in pennation angle (intermedius is the smallest) and cross-sectional area (lateralis is the largest). A similar relation exists for soleus and the two heads (medial and lateral) of gastrocnemius. Movement involves the muscle-controlled rota tion of adjacent body segments, which means that the capacity of a muscle to contribute to a movement

also depends on its location relative to the joint that it spans. The rotary force exerted by a muscle about a joint is referred to as muscle torque and is calculated as the product of the muscle force and the moment arm, the shortest perpendicular distance from the line of pull of the muscle to the joint's center (Figure 31–14). The moment arm usually changes as a joint rotates through its range of motion; the amount of change depends on where the muscle is attached to the skeleton

## Movement speed depends on the contraction velocity of a muscle. The only ways to vary contraction velocity

Torque ext = Fe Fext × de dext Torque ex = F Fex × d dex

=

are to alter either the number of motor units recruited or

<!-- image -->

× ds dseg Fload the rates at which they discharge action potentials. The velocity of a contraction can vary in both magnitude and direction (see Figure 31–11B). To control the velocity of a contraction, the nervous system must scale the magnitude of the net muscle torque relative to the load torque (Figure 31–14), which includes both the weight of the body part and any external load acting on the body. When muscle torque exceeds load torque, the muscle shortens as it performs a shortening contraction. When muscle torque is less than load torque, the muscle length-

Fl

Fload

Fl

product of its contractile force (F) and its moment arm relative

to the joint (d). The moment arm is the shortest perpendicular distance from the line of pull of the muscle to the center of rotation of the joint. Because the moment arm changes when the joint rotates, muscle torque varies with angular displacement about the joint. The net torque about a joint, which determines the mechanical action, is the difference in the torques exerted by opposing muscles, such as extensors (ext) and flexors (flex). Similarly, a force applied to the limb (Fl Fload ) will exert a torque about the joint that depends on Fl Fload and its distance from the joint (ds dseg ).

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 754

ens as it performs a lengthening contraction. For the example shown in Figure 31–14, the load is lifted with a shortening contraction of the flexor and lowered with a lengthening contraction of the flexor. Both types of contractions are common in daily activities. Shortening and lengthening contractions are not simply the result of adjusting motor unit activity so that the net muscle torque is greater or less than the

load torque. When the task involves lifting a load with a prescribed trajectory, activation of the motor units must be aligned so that the sum of the rise times produce the appropriate torque so as to match the desired trajectory while lifting (shortening contractions), whereas while lowering the load (lengthening contractions), the sum of the decay times must be similarly

20/01/21 2:39 PM

controlled. The nervous system accomplishes this with

different descending input and sensory feedback dur-

ing the two types of contractions. Because of these dif-

ferences in required motor unit activity, the control of the two types of contraction respond differently to stresses imposed on the system. Declines in the capacity to control motor unit activity, such as observed in older adults and persons performing rehabilitation exercises after an orthopedic procedure, are associated with greater difficulty in performing lengthening contractions. The amount of motor unit activity relative to the load also influences the contraction velocity. This effect

A

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 755

Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


depends on both the number of motor units recruited

and the maximal rates at which the motor units can

discharge action potentials. As described previously,

physical training with rapid contractions, such as power training, increases the rate at which motor units can discharge trains of action potentials, which can be mimicked by step injections of current into a motor neuron. Changes in the maximal shortening velocity of a muscle after a change in the habitual level of physical activity are the result, at least partly, of factors that influence the ability of motor neurons to discharge action potentials at high rates. Movements Involve the Coordination of Many Muscles

## In the simplest case, muscles span a single joint and cause the attached body segments to accelerate about a single

axis of rotation. Because muscles can exert only a pulling

force, motion about a single axis of rotation requires at least two muscles or groups of muscles when the action involves shortening contractions (Figure 31–15A). Because most muscles attach to the skeleton slightly off center from the axis of rotation, they can cause movement about more than one axis of rotation.

Figure 31–15 (Left) Antagonist muscles spanning a single joint If one of the actions is not required, the nervous system must activate other muscles to control the unwanted movement. For example, activation of the radial flexor muscle of the wrist can cause the wrist to flex and abduct. If the intended action is only wrist flexion, then the abduction action must be opposed by another muscle, such as the ulnar flexor muscle, which causes wrist flexion and adduction. Depending on the geometry of the articulating surfaces and the attachment sites of the muscles, the multiple muscles that span a joint are capable of producing movements about one to three axes of rotation. Furthermore, some structures

control movement of a limb about a single axis of rotation.

A. According to Newton's law of acceleration (force = mass ×

acceleration), force is required to change the velocity of a mass. Muscles exert a torque to accelerate the inertial mass of the skel-

etal segment around a joint. For angular motion, Newton's law is written as torque = rotational inertia × angular acceleration. B. The angular velocity for movement of a limb from one position to another has a bell-shaped profile. Acceleration in one direction is followed by acceleration in the opposite direction—the flexor and

- extensor muscles are activated in succession. The records here show the activation profiles and associated muscle torques for a fast elbow flexion movement. Because contractile force decays relatively slowly, the flexor muscle is usually activated a second time to counter the prolonged acceleration generated by the extensor muscle and to stop the limb at the intended joint angle.

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

can be displaced linearly (eg, the scapula on the trunk),

adding to the degrees of freedom about a joint.

The off-axis attachment of muscles enhances the

flexibility of the skeletal motor system; the same movement can be achieved by activating different combina-

tions of muscles. However, this additional flexibility requires the nervous system to control the unwanted actions. A solution used by the nervous system is to organize relations among selected muscles to produce specific actions. A particular sequence of muscle activations is known as a muscle synergy, and movement is produced through the coordinated activation of these synergies. For example, EMG recordings of human subjects suggest that variations of movements with the same general purpose, such as grasping various objects with the hand, reaching and pointing in different directions, or walking and running at several speeds, are controlled by approximately five muscle synergies. The number of muscles that participate in a movement also varies with the speed of the movement. For example, slow lifting of a load requires only that the

Figure 31–16 A single muscle can

influence the motion about many

joints.

A. Muscles that cross one joint can accelerate an adjacent body segment. For example, at the beginning

of the swing phase while running, the hip flexor muscles are activated to accelerate the thigh forward (red arrow). This action causes the lower leg to rotate backward (blue arrow) and the knee joint to flex. To control the knee joint flexion during the first part of the swing phase, the knee extensor muscles are activated and undergo a lengthening contraction to accelerate the lower leg forward (red arrow) while it continues to rotate backward (blue arrow). B. Many muscles cross more than one joint to exert an effect on more than one body segment. For example,

the hamstring muscles of the leg accelerate the hip in the direction of extension and the knee in the direc tion of flexion (red arrows). During running, at the end of the swing phase, the hamstring muscles are activated and undergo lengthening contractions to control the forward rotation of the leg (hip flexion and knee extension). This strategy is more economical than activating individual muscles at the hip and knee joints to control the forward rotation of the leg.

A

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 756

muscle torque slightly exceed the load torque (see Figure

31–14), and thus, only the flexor muscle is activated. This

strategy is used when lifting a handheld weight with the

-

elbow flexor muscles. In contrast, to perform this movement rapidly with an abrupt termination at an intended joint angle, both the flexor and extensor muscles must be activated. First, the flexor muscle is activated to acceler ate the limb in the direction of flexion, followed by activation of the extensor muscle to accelerate the limb in the direction of extension, and finally a burst of activity by the flexor muscle to increase the angular momentum of the limb and the handheld weight in the direction of flexion so that it arrives at the desired joint angle (Figure 31–15B). The amount of extensor muscle activity increases with the speed of the movement. Increases in movement speed introduce another factor that the nervous system must control: unwanted accelerations in other body segments. Because body

parts are connected to one another, motion in one part can induce motion in another. The induced motion is often controlled with lengthening contractions, such as

Direction of force exerted by muscle

Direction of rotation of limb segment

20/01/21 2:39 PM

those experienced by thigh muscles during the swing

phase of running (Figure 31–16A).

Muscles that span more than one joint can be

used to control these motion-dependent interactions between body parts. At the end of the swing phase in

running, activation of the hamstring muscles causes both the thigh and lower leg to accelerate backward (Figure 31–16B). If a hip extensor muscle is used to accelerate the thigh backward instead of the hamstring muscles, the lower leg would accelerate forward, requiring activation of a knee flexor muscle to control the unwanted lower leg motion so that the foot could be placed on the ground. Use of the two-joint hamstring muscles is a more economical strategy, but one that can subject the hamstrings to high stresses during fast movements, such as sprinting. The control of such B A Extensors stretching Extensors shortening Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


motion-dependent interactions often involves length-

ening contractions, which maximize muscle stiffness

and the ability of muscle to resist changes in length.

For most movements, the nervous system must establish rigid connections between some body parts for two reasons. First, as expressed in Newton's law

of action and reaction, a reaction force must provide a foundation for the acceleration of a body part. For example, in a reaching movement performed by a person standing upright, the ground must provide a reaction force against the feet. The muscle actions that produce the arm movement exert forces that are transmitted through the body to the feet and are opposed by the ground. Different substrates provide different amounts of reaction force, which is why ice or sand can influence movement capabilities.

125 250

Velocity (mm/s)

<!-- image -->

duced, with permission, from Finni, Komi, and Lepola 2000.

Copyright © 2000, Springer-Verlag; Gregor et al. 1988.) A. The force in the Achilles tendon (orange) and patellar tendon (purple) vary during the ground-contact phase of two-legged hopping. The feet contact the ground at touchdown (TD) and

leave the ground at toe-off (TO). For approximately the first half of the movement, the quadriceps and triceps surae muscles lengthen, performing negative work (negative velocity). The muscles perform positive work when they shorten (positive velocity). The sites of force transducer measurements are indicated by rectangles.

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 757

ground (TD) until it leaves the ground (TO). The force exerted by

the muscle during the shortening contraction (positive velocity) is greater than the peak forces measured when the muscle contracts maximally against various constant loads (isotonic loading). Negative velocity reflects a lengthening contraction in the soleus muscle. The power produced by the soleus muscle of the cat during running is greater than that produced in an isolated-muscle experiment (dashed line). The phase of negative power corresponds to the lengthening contraction just after the paw is placed on the ground (TD), when the muscle performs negative work.

20/01/21 2:39 PM
those experienced by thigh muscles during the swing

phase of running (Figure 31–16A).

Muscles that span more than one joint can be

used to control these motion-dependent interactions between body parts. At the end of the swing phase in

running, activation of the hamstring muscles causes both the thigh and lower leg to accelerate backward (Figure 31–16B). If a hip extensor muscle is used to accelerate the thigh backward instead of the hamstring muscles, the lower leg would accelerate forward, requiring activation of a knee flexor muscle to control the unwanted lower leg motion so that the foot could be placed on the ground. Use of the two-joint hamstring muscles is a more economical strategy, but one that can subject the hamstrings to high stresses during fast movements, such as sprinting. The control of such B A Extensors stretching Extensors shortening Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action


motion-dependent interactions often involves length-

ening contractions, which maximize muscle stiffness

and the ability of muscle to resist changes in length.

For most movements, the nervous system must establish rigid connections between some body parts for two reasons. First, as expressed in Newton's law

of action and reaction, a reaction force must provide a foundation for the acceleration of a body part. For example, in a reaching movement performed by a person standing upright, the ground must provide a reaction force against the feet. The muscle actions that produce the arm movement exert forces that are transmitted through the body to the feet and are opposed by the ground. Different substrates provide different amounts of reaction force, which is why ice or sand can influence movement capabilities.

125 250

Velocity (mm/s)

<!-- image -->

duced, with permission, from Finni, Komi, and Lepola 2000.

Copyright © 2000, Springer-Verlag; Gregor et al. 1988.) A. The force in the Achilles tendon (orange) and patellar tendon (purple) vary during the ground-contact phase of two-legged hopping. The feet contact the ground at touchdown (TD) and

leave the ground at toe-off (TO). For approximately the first half of the movement, the quadriceps and triceps surae muscles lengthen, performing negative work (negative velocity). The muscles perform positive work when they shorten (positive velocity). The sites of force transducer measurements are indicated by rectangles.

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 757

ground (TD) until it leaves the ground (TO). The force exerted by

the muscle during the shortening contraction (positive velocity) is greater than the peak forces measured when the muscle contracts maximally against various constant loads (isotonic loading). Negative velocity reflects a lengthening contraction in the soleus muscle. The power produced by the soleus muscle of the cat during running is greater than that produced in an isolated-muscle experiment (dashed line). The phase of negative power corresponds to the lengthening contraction just after the paw is placed on the ground (TD), when the muscle performs negative work.

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Part V / Movement

Second, uncertain conditions are usually accom-

modated by stiffening the joints through concurrent

activation of the muscles that produce force in oppo-

site directions. Coactivation of opposing muscles occurs often when a support surface is unsteady, when the body might experience an unexpected perturbation, or when lifting a heavy load. Because coactivation increases the energetic cost of performing a task, one characteristic of skilled performance is the ability to accomplish a task with minimal activation of muscles that produce opposing actions. Muscle Work Depends on the Pattern of Activation

Limb muscles in healthy young adults are active 10%

## to 20% of the time during waking hours. For much of this time, the muscles perform constant-length

(isometric) contractions to maintain a variety of static body postures. In contrast, muscle length has to change during a movement so that the muscle can perform work to displace body parts. A muscle performs positive work and produces power during a shortening contraction, whereas it performs negative work and absorbs power during a lengthening contraction. The capacity of muscle to do positive work establishes performance capabilities, such as the maximal height that can be jumped. The nervous system can augment the positive work capacity of muscle by commanding a brief period of negative work before performing positive work. This

activation sequence, the stretch–shorten cycle, occurs in many movements. When a person jumps in place on two feet, for example, the support phase involves an initial stretch (lengthening) and subsequent shortening of the ankle extensor and knee extensor muscles (Figure 31–17A). The forces in the Achilles and patellar tendons increase during the stretch of the lengthening contraction and reach a maximum at the onset of the shortening phase. As a result, the muscles can perform more positive work and produce more power during the shortening contraction (Figure 31–17B). Although negative work involves an increase in the length of the muscle, the length of the fascicles in the muscle often remains relatively constant, which

indicates that the connective tissue structures are stretched prior to the shortening contraction. Thus, the capacity of the muscle to perform more positive work comes from strain energy that can be stored in the elastic elements of muscle and tendon during the stretch phase and released during the subsequent shortening phase. More strain energy can be stored in long tendons, but short tendons are more advantageous when the movement requires the rapid release of strain energy.

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 758

Highlights

1.

The basic functional unit for the control of move

-

ment by the nervous system is the motor unit,

which comprises a motor neuron and the muscle

- fibers it innervates. 2. The force exerted by a muscle depends in part on the number and properties of the motor units that are activated and the rates at which
- they discharge action potentials. The key motor unit properties include contraction speed, maximal force, and fatigability, all of which can be altered by physical activity. Motor unit properties vary continuously across the population that innervates each muscle; that is, there are not distinct types of motor units. Due to technological advances, it is becoming possible to characterize the adaptations exhibited by populations of motor units in response to different types of changes in physical activity. 3. Motor units tend to be activated in a stereotypical order that is highly correlated with motor neuron size. The rate at which motor units are recruited
- during a voluntary contraction increases with contraction speed. 4. The rate at which a motor unit discharges action potentials in response to a given synaptic input can be modulated by descending inputs from
- the brain stem. The modulatory input is likely critical for establishing the level of excitation in spinal pathways, but this has been difficult to demonstrate in humans. 5. Except at low muscle forces, variation in discharge rate has a greater influence on muscle force than does the number of activated motor
- units. Moreover, the variability in discharge rate of the motor unit population influences the level of fine motor control. 6. The sarcomere is the smallest element of muscle to include a complete set of contractile proteins. A transient connection between the contractile proteins
- myosin and actin, known as the cross-bridge cycle, enables muscle to exert a force. The organization of the sarcomeres within a muscle varies substantially and, in addition to motor unit activity, has a major effect on the contractile properties of the muscle. 7. For a given arrangement of sarcomeres, the force a muscle can exert depends on the activation of the cross bridges by Ca 2+ , the amount of overlap
- between the thick and thin filaments, and the velocity of the moving filaments. Sarcomere force during lengthening contractions is augmented by a Ca 2+ -mediated increase in titin stiffness. The force

20/01/21 2:39 PM

produced by activated sarcomeres depends on

the interactions of three filaments: actin, myosin,

and titin.

8. Most of the force generated by activated sarcomeres is transmitted laterally through a network of noncontractile proteins that maintains the alignment
2. of the thick and thin filaments. 9. The functional capability of a muscle depends on the torque that it can exert, which is influenced both by its contractile properties and by the loca-
3. tion of its attachments on the skeleton relative to the joint that it spans. 10. To perform a movement, the nervous system activates multiple muscles and controls the torque exerted about the involved joints. The nervous
4. system can vary the magnitude and direction of a movement by altering the amount of motor unit activity, and hence muscle torque, relative to the load acting on the body. 11. Although muscle exerts only a pulling force on the skeleton, it can do so whether the activated muscle shortens or is lengthened by a load torque that
5. exceeds the muscle torque. The force capacity of muscle is greater during lengthening contractions. Motor unit activity differs during shortening and lengthening contractions, but little is known about how the synaptic inputs to motor neurons differ during these two types of contractions. 12. Faster movements elicit motion-dependent interactions between body parts that produce unwanted accelerations. These actions must be
6. controlled by the nervous system to produce an intended movement. 13. The nervous system must coordinate the activity of multiple muscles to provide a mechanical link between moving body parts and the required sup-
7. port from the surroundings. The muscles engaged for each action, such as grasping, reaching, running, and walking, are organized into a few sets that exhibit a stereotypical pattern of activation, but it is not known why particular patterns are preferred. 14. The patterns of muscle activity vary substantially between movements and often include strategies that augment the work capacity of muscles. The
8. patterns can be modified by experience, but little is known about the locus of the adaptations other than that both spinal and supraspinal pathways are involved.

Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action

Selected Reading

Booth FW. 2015. Muscle adaptation to exercise: new Saltin's

paradigms. Scand J Med Sci Sports Suppl 4:49–52.

Duchateau J, Enoka RM. 2011. Human motor unit record-

- ings: origins and insights into the integrated motor system. Brain Res 1409:42–62.
- Enoka RM. 2015. Neuromechanics of Human Movement. 5th ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. Farina D, Negro F, Muceli S, Enoka RM. 2016. Principles of
- motor unit physiology evolve with advances in technology. Physiology 31:83–94.
- Gordon AM, Regnier M, Homsher E. 2001. Skeletal and cardiac muscle contractile activation: tropomyosin "rocks and rolls." News Physiol Sci 16:49–55.
- Heckman CJ, Enoka RM. 2012. Motor unit. Compr Physiol 2:2629–2682. Herzog W, Schappacher G, DuVall M, Leonard TR, Herzog
- JA. 2016. Residual force enhancement following eccentric contractions: a new mechanism involving titin. Physiol-
- ogy 31:300–312. Hunter SK, Pereira HM, Keenan KG. 2016. The aging neuromuscular system and motor performance. J Appl Physiol 121:982–995.
- Huxley AF. 2000. Mechanics and models of the myosin motor. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 355:433–440. Lieber RL, Ward SR. 2011. Skeletal muscle design to meet
- functional demands. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:1466–1476.
- Merletti R, Muceli S. 2020. Tutorial. Surface EMG detection in space and time: best practices. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 49:102363.
- Narici M, Franchi M, Maganaris C. 2016. Muscle structural assembly and functional consequences. J Exp Biol 219:276–284.
- References

Alexander RM, Ker RF. 1990. The architecture of leg muscles.

In: JM Winters, SL-Y Woo (eds). Multiple Muscle Systems:

Biomechanics and Movement Organization, pp. 568–577.

- New York: Springer-Verlag. Azizi E, Roberts TJ. 2012. Geared up to stretch: pennate muscle behavior during active lengthening. J Exp Biol 217:376–381. Bloom W, Fawcett DW. 1975. A Textbook of Histology. 10th ed.
- Philadelphia, PA: Saunders. Botterman BR, Iwamoto GA, Gonyea WJ. 1986. Gradation of
- isometric tension by different activation rates in motor units of cat flexor carpi radialis muscle. J Neurophysiol 56:494–506.
- Bottinelli R, Canepari M, Pellegrino MA, Reggiani C. 1996. Force-velocity properties of human skeletal muscle fibres: myosin heavy chain isoform and temperature depend-
- ence. J Physiol 495:573–586. Del Vecchio A, Negro F, Felici F, Farina D. 2017. Associations between motor unit action potential parameters and surface EMG features. J Appl Physiol 123:835–843.
- Roger M. Enoka Desmedt JE, Godaux E. 1977. Ballistic contractions in man: characteristic recruitment pattern of single motor units of the tibialis anterior muscle. J Physiol 264:673–693.

20/01/21 2:39 PM

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 759



Part V / Movement

Duchateau J, Enoka RM. 2016. Neural control of lengthening

contractions. J Exp Biol 219:197–204.

Enoka RM, Duchateau J. 2016. Translating muscle fatigue to

- human performance. Med Sci Sport Exerc 48:2228–2238. Enoka RM, Duchateau J. 2017. Rate coding and the control
- of muscle force. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 27:1–12. Enoka RM, Fuglevand AJ. 2001. Motor unit physiology: some
- unresolved issues. Muscle Nerve 24:4–17. Erim Z, De Luca CJ, Mineo K, Aoki T. 1996. Rank-ordered
- regulation of motor units. Muscle Nerve 19:563–573. Farina D, Merletti R, Enoka RM. 2014. The extraction of neu-
- ral strategies from the surface EMG: an update. J Appl Physiol 117:1215–1230.
- Finni T, Komi PV, Lepola V. 2000. In vivo human triceps surae and quadriceps muscle function in a squat jump and counter movement jump. Eur J Appl Physiol 83:416–426.
- Fuglevand AJ, Macefield VG, Bigland-Ritchie B. 1999. Forcefrequency and fatigue properties of motor units in muscles that control digits of the human hand. J Neurophysiol
- 81:1718–1729. Gordon AM, Regnier M, Homsher R. 2001. Skeletal and cardiac muscle contractile activation: tropomyosin "rocks and rolls." News Physiol Sci 16:49–55.
- Gregor RJ, Roy RR, Whiting WC, Lovely RG, Hodgson JA, Edgerton VR. 1988. Mechanical output of the cat soleus during treadmill locomotion: in vivo vs in situ character-
- istics. J Biomech 21:721–732. Heckman CJ, Mottram C, Quinlan K, Theiss R, Schuster J. 2009. Motoneuron excitability: the importance of neuromodulatory inputs. Clin Neurophysiol. 120:2040–2054.
- Henneman E, Somjen G, Carpenter DO. 1965. Functional significance of cell size in spinal motoneurons. J Neurophysiol 28:560–580.
- Hepple RT, Rice CL. 2016. Innervation and neuromuscular control in ageing skeletal muscle. J Physiol 594:1965–1978. Huxley AF, Simmons RM. 1971. Proposed mechanism of
- force generation in striated muscle. Nature 233:533–538. Kubo K, Miyazaki D, Shimoju S, Tsunoda N. 2015. Relation-
- ship between elastic properties of tendon structures and performance in long distance runners. Eur J Appl Physiol
- 115:1725–1733. Lai A, Schache AG, Lin YC, Pandy MG. 2014. Tendon elastic strain energy in the human ankle plantar-flexors and its role with increased running speed. J Exp Biol 217:3159–3168.
- Lieber RL, Fridén J. 2000. Functional and clinical significance of skeletal muscle architecture. Muscle Nerve 23:1647–1666. Lieber RL, Ward SR. 2011. Skeletal muscle design to meet
- functional demands. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:1466–1476.
- Liddell EGT, Sherrington CS. 1925. Recruitment and some other factors of reflex inhibition. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 97:488–518.
- Maas H, Finni T. 2018. Mechanical coupling between muscletendon units reduces peak stresses. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 46:26–33.

Kandel-Ch31\_0737-0760.indd 760

Macefield VG, Fuglevand AJ, Bigland-Ritchie B. 1996. Con-

tractile properties of single motor units in human toe

extensors assessed by intraneural motor axon stimulation.

- J Neurophysiol 75:2509–2519. Milner-Brown HS, Stein RB, Yemm R. 1973. The orderly recruitment of human motor units during voluntary isometric contraction. J Physiol 230:359–370.
- Moritz CT, Barry BK, Pascoe MA, Enoka RM. 2005. Discharge rate variability influences the variation in force fluctuations across the working range of a hand muscle. J Neuro-
- physiol 93:2449–2459. O'Connor SM, Cheng EJ, Young KW, Ward SR, Lieber RL. 2016. Quantification of sarcomere length distribution in whole muscle frozen sections. J Exp Biol 219:1432–1436.
- Overduin SA, d'Avella A, Roh J, Carmena JM, Bizzi E. 2015. Representation of muscle synergies in the primate brain. J Neurosci 35:12615–12624.
- Palmisano MG, Bremner SN, Homberger TA, et al. 2015. Skeletal muscle intermediate filaments form a stresstransmitting and stress-signalling network. J Cell Sci 128:
- 219–224. Person RS, Kudina LP. 1972. Discharge frequency and discharge pattern of human motor units during voluntary contraction of muscle. Electroencephalogr Clin Neuro-
- physiol 32:471–483. Sawicki GS, Robertson BD, Azizi E, Roberts TJ. 2015. Timing matters: tuning the mechanics of a muscle-tendon unit by adjusting stimulation phase during cyclic contractions.
- J Exp Biol 218:3150–3159. Schache AG, Dorn TW, Williams GP, Brown NA, Pandy MG. 2014. Lower-limb muscular strategies for increasing running speed. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 44:813–824.
- Sherrington CS. 1925. Remarks on some aspects of reflex inhibition. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 97:519–545. Trappe S, Costill D, Gallagher P, et al. 2009. Exercise in space:
- human skeletal muscle after 6 months aboard the Interna tional Space Station. J Appl Physiol 106:1159–1168.

-

- Trappe S, Luden N, Minchev K, Raue U, Jemiolo B, Trappe TA. 2015. Skeletal muscle signature of a champion sprint runner. J Appl Physiol 118:1460–1466.
- Van Cutsem M, Duchateau J, Hainaut K. 1998. Changes in single motor unit behaviour contribute to the increase in contraction speed after dynamic training in humans.
- J Physiol 513:295–305. Van Cutsem M, Feiereisen P, Duchateau J, Hainaut K. 1997. Mechanical properties and behaviour of motor units in the tibialis anterior during voluntary contractions. Can
- J Appl Physiol 22:585–597. Ward SR, Eng CM Smallwood LH, Lieber RL. 2009. Are current measurements of lower extremity muscle architecture accurate? Clin Orthop Rel Res 467:1074–1082.

20/01/21 2:39 PM


Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord

Reflex Pathways in the Spinal Cord Produce Coordinated

Patterns of Muscle Contraction

The Stretch Reflex Acts to Resist the Lengthening

## of a Muscle Neuronal Networks in the Spinal Cord Contribute to the

Coordination of Reflex Responses The Stretch Reflex Involves a Monosynaptic Pathway

## Gamma Motor Neurons Adjust the Sensitivity of Muscle Spindles

The Stretch Reflex Also Involves Polysynaptic Pathways

Golgi Tendon Organs Provide Force-Sensitive Feedback to the Spinal Cord

Cutaneous Reflexes Produce Complex Movements

That Serve Protective and Postural Functions Convergence of Sensory Inputs on Interneurons

Increases the Flexibility of Reflex Contributions to Movement

Sensory Feedback and Descending Motor Commands Interact at Common Spinal Neurons to Produce Voluntary Movements

## Muscle Spindle Sensory Afferent Activity Reinforces Central Commands for Movements Through the Ia Monosynaptic Reflex Pathway

Modulation of Ia inhibitory Interneurons and Renshaw Cells by Descending Inputs Coordinate Muscle Activity at Joints

Transmission in Reflex Pathways May Be Facilitated or Inhibited by Descending Motor Commands Descending Inputs Modulate Sensory Input to the Spinal

Cord by Changing the Synaptic Efficiency of Primary Sensory Fibers

Part of the Descending Command for Voluntary Movements Is Conveyed Through Spinal Interneurons

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 761

Propriospinal Neurons in the C3–C4 Segments Mediate

Part of the Corticospinal Command for Movement of

the Upper Limb

Neurons in Spinal Reflex Pathways Are Activated Prior to Movement Proprioceptive Reflexes Play an Important Role in Regulating

Both Voluntary and Automatic Movements Spinal Reflex Pathways Undergo Long-Term Changes

## Damage to the Central Nervous System Produces Characteristic Alterations in Reflex Responses

## Interruption of Descending Pathways to the Spinal Cord

## Frequently Produces Spasticity Lesion of the Spinal Cord in Humans Leads to a Period

of Spinal Shock Followed by Hyperreflexia Highlights


uring purposeful movements the central nerv

-

ous system uses information from a vast array

of sensory receptors to ensure that the pattern

of muscle activity suits the purpose. Without this sensory information, movements tend to be imprecise, and tasks requiring fine coordination in the hands, such as buttoning one's shirt, are difficult. The sensory-motor integration that makes the ongoing regulation of movement possible takes place at many levels of the nervous system, but the spinal cord has a special role because of the close coupling in the cord between sensory input and the motor output to the muscles. Charles Sherrington was among the first to recognize the importance of sensory information in regulating movements. In 1906, he proposed that simple

18/01/21 6:03 PM


Part V / Movement

reflexes—stereotyped movements elicited by activa-

tion of receptors in skin or muscle—are the basic units

for movement. He also emphasized that all parts of were originally thought to be an intrinsic property of muscles. Early in the 20th century, however, Liddell and Sherrington showed that the stretch reflex could

the nervous system are connected and that no part is ever capable of activation without affecting or being affected by other parts. In his words, the simple reflex is a convenient if not a probable fiction. Laboratory studies of reflexes in animals from the 1950s and onward demonstrated that descend ing motor pathways and afferent sensory pathways

-be abolished by cutting either the dorsal or ventral root, thus establishing that these reflexes require sensory input from muscle to spinal cord and a return path to muscle (Figure 32–1A). We now know that the receptor that senses the change of length is the muscle spindle (Box 32–1) and that the type Ia sensory axon from this receptor

converge on common interneurons in the spinal cord. Later research in intact animals and in humans engaged in normal behavior confirmed that the neural circuitries in the spinal cord take part in conveying and shaping the motor command to the muscles by integrating descending motor commands and sensory feedback signals. Nevertheless, the idea of simple reflexes is convenient for understanding the principles of organization of sensory-motor integration in the spinal cord and of how sensory input to different spinal circuits contributes to movement control. In this chapter, we explain the principles underlying sensory-motor integration in the spinal cord and describe how this integration regulates movement. For makes direct excitatory connections with motor neurons. (The classification of sensory fibers from muscle is discussed in Box 32–2.) The afferent axon also connects to interneurons that inhibit the motor neurons innervating antagonist muscles, an arrangement called reciprocal innervation. This inhibition prevents muscle contractions that might otherwise resist the movements produced by the stretch reflexes. Sherrington developed an experimental model for investigating spinal circuitry that is especially valuable in the study of stretch reflexes. He conducted his

this purpose, we must first have a thorough knowledge of how reflex pathways in the spinal cord are organized. Reflex Pathways in the Spinal Cord Produce

Coordinated Patterns of Muscle Contraction

## The sensory stimuli that activate spinal reflex pathways act outside the spinal cord, on receptors in mus-

cles, joints, and skin. By contrast, the neural circuitry

responsible for the motor response is entirely contained within the spinal cord. The interneurons in the reflex pathways and the resulting reflexes have traditionally been classified based on the sensory modality and type of sensory fiber that activates the interneurons. As we shall see, this classification is inconsistent with the significant convergence of multiple modalities on common interneurons, but as a starting point, it is still useful to distinguish reflex pathways based on whether the principal sensory input originates from muscle or skin. The Stretch Reflex Acts to Resist the Lengthening of a Muscle

## The simplest and certainly the most studied spinal reflex is the stretch reflex, a reflex muscle contraction

elicited by lengthening of the muscle. Stretch reflexes

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 762

experiments on cats whose brain stems had been surgically transected at the level of the midbrain, between the superior and inferior colliculi. This is referred to as a decerebrate preparation. The effect of this procedure is to disconnect the rest of the brain from the spinal cord, thus blocking sensations of pain as well as interrupting normal modulation of reflexes by higher brain centers. A decerebrate animal has stereotyped and usually heightened stretch reflexes, making it easier to examine the factors controlling their expression. Without control by higher brain centers, descending pathways from the brain stem powerfully facilitate the neuronal circuits involved in the stretch reflexes of

extensor muscles. This results in a dramatic increase in tone of the extensor muscle that sometimes can suffice to support the animal in a standing position. In normal animals and humans, owing to the balance between facilitation and inhibition, stretch reflexes are weaker and considerably more variable in strength than those in decerebrate animals. Neuronal Networks in the Spinal Cord

Contribute to the Coordination of Reflex

Responses

## The Stretch Reflex Involves a Monosynaptic Pathway The neural circuit responsible for the stretch reflex

## was one of the first reflex pathways to be examined in detail. The physiological basis of this reflex was

examined by measuring the latency of the response in

18/01/21 6:03 PM

A Monosynaptic pathways (stretch reex)

Ia inhibitory

interneuron

Homonymous muscle

<!-- image -->

Cutaneous afferent

ber from nociceptor (Aδ)

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 763

small force (dashed line) after the sensory afferents in the dorsal roots have been severed. (Adapted, with permission, from Liddell and Sherrington 1924.) B. In polysynaptic pathways, one excitatory pathway activates motor neurons that innervate ipsilateral flexor muscles, which withdraw the limb from noxious Extensor muscle neurons

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord

Dorsal roots

intact

<!-- image -->

contractions of numerous muscles in the limbs.

A. In monosynaptic pathways, Ia sensory axons from

muscle spindles make excitatory connections on two sets of motor neurons: alpha motor neurons that

innervate the same (homonymous) muscle from which they arise and motor neurons that innervate synergist muscles. They also act through interneurons to inhibit the motor neurons that innervate antagonist muscles. When a muscle is stretched by a tendon tap with a reflex hammer, the firing rate in the sensory fiber from the spindle increases. This leads to contraction of the same muscle and its synergists and relaxation of the antagonist. The reflex therefore tends to counteract the stretch, enhancing the spring-like properties of the muscles. The records on the right demonstrate the reflex nature of contractions produced by muscle stretch in a decerebrate cat. When an extensor muscle is stretched, it normally produces a large force, but it produces a very Activated motor

stimuli, while another pathway simultaneously excites motor neurons that innervate contralateral extensor muscles, providing support during withdrawal of the limb. Inhibitory interneurons ensure that the motor neurons supplying antagonist muscles are inactive during the reflex response. (Adapted, with permission, from Schmidt 1983.) Opposite leg supports


18/01/21 6:03 PM


Part V / Movement

Box 32–1 Muscle Spindles

## Muscle spindles are small encapsulated sensory recep-

tors that have a spindle-like or fusiform shape and are

located within the fleshy part of a muscle. Their main

function is to signal changes in the length of the muscle within which they reside. Changes in length of muscles are closely associated with changes in the angles of the joints that the muscles cross. Thus, muscle spindles are used by the central nervous system to sense relative positions of the body segments. Each spindle has three main components: (1) a group of specialized intrafusal muscle fibers with noncontractile central regions; (2) sensory fibers that termi-

nate on the central regions of the intrafusal fibers; and (3) motor axons that terminate on the contractile polar regions of the intrafusal fibers (Figure 32–2A,B). When the intrafusal fibers are stretched, often referred to as "loading the spindle," the sensory axon endings are also stretched and increase their firing rate.

Because muscle spindles are arranged in parallel with the extrafusal muscle fibers that make up the main body of the muscle, the intrafusal fibers change in length as the whole muscle changes. Thus, when a muscle is stretched, activity in the sensory axons of muscle spindles increases. When a muscle shortens, the spindle is unloaded and the activity decreases. The intrafusal muscle fibers are innervated by gamma motor neurons, which have small-diameter myelinated axons, whereas the extrafusal muscle fibers are

innervated by alpha motor neurons, with large-diameter myelinated axons. Activation of gamma motor neurons causes shortening of the polar regions of the intrafusal fibers. This in turn stretches the central region from both ends, leading to an increase in firing rate of the sensory axons or to a greater likelihood that the axons will fire in response to stretch of the muscle. Thus, the gamma motor neurons adjust the sensitivity of the muscle spindles. Contraction of the intrafusal muscle fibers does not contribute significantly to the force of muscle contraction. The structure and functional behavior of muscle spindles is considerably more complex than this simple description depicts. As a muscle is stretched, the change

in length has two phases: a dynamic phase, the period

ventral roots to electrical stimulation of dorsal roots.

When the Ia sensory axons innervating the muscle

spindles were selectively activated, the reflex latency

through the spinal cord was less than 1 ms. This demonstrated that the Ia fibers make direct connections on

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 764

during which length is changing, and a static or steady-

state phase, when the muscle has stabilized at a new

length. Structural specializations within each compo-

nent of the muscle spindle enable the sensory axons to signal aspects of each phase separately. The intrafusal muscle fibers include nuclear bag fibers and nuclear chain fibers. The bag fibers can be classified as dynamic or static. A typical spindle has two or

three bag fibers and a variable number of chain fibers, usually about five. Furthermore, the intrafusal fibers receive two types of sensory endings. A single Ia (large diameter) axon spirals around the central region of all intrafusal muscle fibers and serves as the primary sensory ending (Figure 32–2B). A variable number of type II (medium diameter) axons spiral around the static bag and chain fibers near their central regions and serve as secondary sensory endings . The gamma motor neurons can also be divided into two classes: Dynamic gamma motor neurons innervate the dynamic bag fibers, whereas the static gamma motor

neurons innervate the static bag fibers and the chain fibers. This duality of structure is reflected in a duality of function. The tonic discharge of both primary and secondary sensory endings signals the steady-state length

of the muscle. The primary sensory endings are, in addition, highly sensitive to the velocity of stretch, allowing them to provide information about the speed of movements. Because they are highly sensitive to small changes, the primary endings rapidly provide information about sudden unexpected changes in length, which can be used to generate quick corrective reactions. Increases in the firing rate of dynamic gamma motor neurons increase the dynamic sensitivity of primary sensory endings but have no influence on sec-

ondary sensory endings. Increases in the firing rate of static gamma motor neurons increase the tonic level of activity in both primary and secondary sensory endings, decrease the dynamic sensitivity of primary endings (Figure 32–2C), and can prevent the silencing of primary endings when a muscle is released from stretch. Thus, the central nervous system can independently adjust the dynamic and static sensitivity of the different sensory endings in muscle spindles.

the alpha motor neurons because the delay at a single

synapse is typically 0.5 ms to 0.9 ms (Figure 32–3B). In

humans, an analog of the monosynaptic stretch reflex,

the Hoffmann reflex, may be elicited by electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves (Box 32–3).

18/01/21 6:03 PM

A Muscle spindle Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord B Intrafusal bers of the muscle spindle C Response of Ia sensory ber to selective activation of gamma motor neurons

- 200

<!-- image -->

Static nuclear

bag ber Nuclear Dynamic response Steady-state response and static bag fibers, forming a secondary sensory ending.

<!-- image -->

Two types of motor neurons innervate different intrafusal

A. The main components of the muscle spindle are

intrafusal muscle fibers, sensory axon endings, and motor axon endings. The intrafusal fibers are specialized mus-

cle fibers with central regions that are not contractile. Gamma motor neurons innervate the contractile polar regions of the intrafusal fibers. Contraction of the polar regions pulls on the central regions of the intrafusal fiber from both ends. The sensory endings spiral around the central regions of the intrafusal fibers and are responsive to stretch of these fibers. (Adapted, with permission, from Hulliger 1984. Copyright © Springer-Verlag 1984.) B. The muscle spindle contains three types of intrafusal fibers: dynamic nuclear bag, static nuclear bag, and nuclear chain fibers. A single Ia sensory axon innervates all

three types of fibers, forming a primary sensory ending. Type II sensory axons innervate the nuclear chain fibers

The pattern of connections of Ia fibers to motor

neurons can be shown directly by intracellular record-

ing. Ia fibers from a given muscle excite not only the

motor neurons innervating that same (homonymous) muscle but also the motor neurons innervating other

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 765

fibers. Dynamic gamma motor neurons innervate only

dynamic bag fibers; static gamma motor neurons innervate various combinations of chain and static bag fibers. (Adapted, with permission, from Boyd 1980. Copyright © 1980. Published by Elsevier Ltd.) C. Selective stimulation of the two types of gamma motor neurons has different effects on the firing of the Ia sensory fibers from the spindle. Without gamma stimulation,

the Ia fiber shows a small dynamic response to muscle stretch and a modest increase in steady-state firing. When a static gamma motor neuron is stimulated, the steadystate response of the Ia fiber increases but the dynamic response decreases. When a dynamic gamma motor neuron is stimulated, the dynamic response of the Ia fiber is markedly enhanced, but the steady-state response gradually returns to its original level. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and Matthews 1966.)

(heteronymous) muscles with a similar mechanical

action.

Lorne Mendell and Elwood Henneman used a

computer enhancement technique called spike-triggered averaging to determine the extent to which the action

18/01/21 6:03 PM



Part V / Movement

Box 32–2 Classification of Sensory Fibers From Muscle

## Sensory fibers are classified according to their diameter. Axons with larger diameters conduct action poten-

tials more rapidly than those with smaller diameters

(Chapters 9 and 18). Because each class of sensory receptors is innervated by fibers with diameters within a restricted range, this method of classification distinguishes to some extent the fibers that arise from different types of receptor organs. The main groups of sensory fibers from muscle are listed in Table 32–1. The organization of reflex pathways in the spinal cord has been established primarily by electrically stimulating the sensory fibers and recording evoked

Table 32–1 Classification of Sensory Fibers From Muscle responses in different classes of neurons in the spinal cord. This method of activation has three advantages over natural stimulation. The timing of afferent input

Type

Ia Axon

12–20 μm myelinated Receptor Primary spindle ending can be precisely established; the responses evoked in motor neurons and other neurons by different classes of sensory fibers can be assessed by grading the strength of the electrical stimulus; and certain classes of receptors can be selectively activated. The strength of the electrical stimulus required to activate a sensory fiber is measured relative to the strength required to activate the fibers with the largest diameter because these fibers have the lowest threshold for electri -cal activation. The thresholds of most type I fibers usually range from one to two times that of the largest fibers (with Ia fibers having, on average, a slightly lower threshold than Ib fibers). For most type II fibers, the threshold is 2 to 5 times higher, whereas types III and IV have thresholds in the range of 10 to 50 times that of the largest sensory fibers.

Sensitivity to

Muscle length and rate of change of length

| Ib  12–20 μm myelinated  Golgi tendon organ  Muscle tension  II  6–12 μm myelinated  Secondary spindle ending  Muscle length (little rate sensitivity)  II  6–12 μm myelinated  Nonspindle endings  Deep pressure  III  2–6 μm myelinated  Free nerve endings  Pain, chemical stimuli, and temperature (impor-  tant for physiological responses to exercise)  IV  0.5–2 μm nonmyelinated  Free nerve endings  Pain, chemical stimuli, and temperature   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

potentials in single Ia fibers are transmitted to a popu-

lation of spinal motor neurons. They found that indi-

vidual Ia axons make excitatory synapses with all

homonymous motor neurons innervating the medial gastrocnemius of the cat. This widespread divergence effectively amplifies the signals of individual Ia fibers, leading to a strong excitatory drive to the muscle from which they originate (autogenic excitation). The Ia axons in reflex pathways also provide excitatory inputs to many of the motor neurons innervating synergist muscles (up to 60% of the motor neurons

of some synergists) (Figure 32–1A). Although widespread, these connections are not as strong as the connections to homonymous motor neurons.

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 766

The Ia fibers also send inhibitory signals via the

Ia inhibitory interneurons to the alpha motor neurons

innervating antagonistic muscles. This disynaptic

inhibitory pathway is the basis for reciprocal innervation: When a muscle is stretched, its antagonists relax. Gamma Motor Neurons Adjust the Sensitivity of Muscle Spindles

## Activity of muscle spindles may be modulated by changing the level of activity in the gamma motor neurons, which innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers of

muscle spindles (Box 32–1). This function of gamma motor neurons, often referred to as the fusimotor

18/01/21 6:03 PM
Part V / Movement

Box 32–2 Classification of Sensory Fibers From Muscle

## Sensory fibers are classified according to their diameter. Axons with larger diameters conduct action poten-

tials more rapidly than those with smaller diameters

(Chapters 9 and 18). Because each class of sensory receptors is innervated by fibers with diameters within a restricted range, this method of classification distinguishes to some extent the fibers that arise from different types of receptor organs. The main groups of sensory fibers from muscle are listed in Table 32–1. The organization of reflex pathways in the spinal cord has been established primarily by electrically stimulating the sensory fibers and recording evoked

Table 32–1 Classification of Sensory Fibers From Muscle responses in different classes of neurons in the spinal cord. This method of activation has three advantages over natural stimulation. The timing of afferent input

Type

Ia Axon

12–20 μm myelinated Receptor Primary spindle ending can be precisely established; the responses evoked in motor neurons and other neurons by different classes of sensory fibers can be assessed by grading the strength of the electrical stimulus; and certain classes of receptors can be selectively activated. The strength of the electrical stimulus required to activate a sensory fiber is measured relative to the strength required to activate the fibers with the largest diameter because these fibers have the lowest threshold for electri -cal activation. The thresholds of most type I fibers usually range from one to two times that of the largest fibers (with Ia fibers having, on average, a slightly lower threshold than Ib fibers). For most type II fibers, the threshold is 2 to 5 times higher, whereas types III and IV have thresholds in the range of 10 to 50 times that of the largest sensory fibers.

Sensitivity to

Muscle length and rate of change of length

| Ib  12–20 μm myelinated  Golgi tendon organ  Muscle tension  II  6–12 μm myelinated  Secondary spindle ending  Muscle length (little rate sensitivity)  II  6–12 μm myelinated  Nonspindle endings  Deep pressure  III  2–6 μm myelinated  Free nerve endings  Pain, chemical stimuli, and temperature (impor-  tant for physiological responses to exercise)  IV  0.5–2 μm nonmyelinated  Free nerve endings  Pain, chemical stimuli, and temperature   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

potentials in single Ia fibers are transmitted to a popu-

lation of spinal motor neurons. They found that indi-

vidual Ia axons make excitatory synapses with all

homonymous motor neurons innervating the medial gastrocnemius of the cat. This widespread divergence effectively amplifies the signals of individual Ia fibers, leading to a strong excitatory drive to the muscle from which they originate (autogenic excitation). The Ia axons in reflex pathways also provide excitatory inputs to many of the motor neurons innervating synergist muscles (up to 60% of the motor neurons

of some synergists) (Figure 32–1A). Although widespread, these connections are not as strong as the connections to homonymous motor neurons.

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 766

The Ia fibers also send inhibitory signals via the

Ia inhibitory interneurons to the alpha motor neurons

innervating antagonistic muscles. This disynaptic

inhibitory pathway is the basis for reciprocal innervation: When a muscle is stretched, its antagonists relax. Gamma Motor Neurons Adjust the Sensitivity of Muscle Spindles

## Activity of muscle spindles may be modulated by changing the level of activity in the gamma motor neurons, which innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers of

muscle spindles (Box 32–1). This function of gamma motor neurons, often referred to as the fusimotor

18/01/21 6:03 PM

A Experimental setup

Stimulate Ia Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord


under tension, thus maintaining the firing rate of

the Ia fibers within an optimal range for signaling

changes in length, whatever the actual length of the

-

Intracellular recording in motor neuron muscle (Figure 32–5). This alpha-gamma co-activation is recruited for many voluntary movements because it stabilizes the sensitivity of the muscle spindles. In addition to the axons of gamma motor neurons, collaterals of alpha motor neuron axons sometimes innervate the intrafusal fibers. Axons that inner

vate both intrafusal and extrafusal muscle fibers are referred to as beta axons. Beta axon collaterals provide the equivalent of alpha-gamma coactivation. Beta innervation in spindles exists in both cats and humans, although it is unquantified for most muscles. The forced linkage of extrafusal and intrafusal contraction by the beta fusimotor system highlights the importance of the independent fusimotor system (the

5 ms

<!-- image -->

0.7 ms

<!-- image -->

A. An intracellular recording electrode is inserted into the cell

body of a spinal motor neuron that innervates an extensor muscle. Stimulation of Ia sensory fibers from flexor or extensor mus-

1 mV gamma motor neurons). Indeed, in lower vertebrates, such as amphibians, beta efferents are the only source of intrafusal innervation. Mammals have evolved a mecha -nism that frees muscle spindles from complete dependence on the behavior of their parent muscles. In principle, this uncoupling allows greater flexibility in controlling spindle sensitivity for different types of motor tasks. This conclusion is supported by recordings in spindle sensory axons during a variety of natural movements in cats. The amount and type of activity in gamma motor

cles produces a volley of action potentials at the dorsal root. B. Left: When Ia fibers from an extensor muscle are stimulated, the latency between the recording of the afferent volley and the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the motor neuron is

only 0.7 ms, approximately equal to the duration of signal transmission across a single synapse. Thus, it can be inferred that the excitatory action of the stretch reflex pathway is monosynaptic. Right: When Ia fibers from an antagonist flexor muscle are stimulated, the latency between the recording of the afferent volley and the inhibitory postsynaptic potential in the motor neuron is 1.6 ms, approximately twice the duration of signal transmission across a single synapse. Thus, it can be inferred that the inhibitory action of the stretch reflex pathway is disynaptic. system, can be demonstrated by selectively stimulat- neurons are set at steady levels, which vary according to the specific task or context. In general, activity levels in both static and dynamic gamma motor neurons (Figure 32–2B) are set at progressively higher levels as the speed and difficulty of the movement increase. Unpredictable conditions, such as when the cat is picked up or handled, lead to marked increases in activity in dynamic gamma motor neurons and thus increased spindle responsiveness when muscles are stretched. When an animal is performing a difficult task, such as walking across a narrow beam, both static and dynamic gamma activation are at high levels (Figure 32–6). Thus, the nervous system uses the fusimotor system to fine-tune muscle spindles so that the ensemble output of the spindles provides information most appropriate

ing the alpha and gamma motor neurons under experi-

mental conditions.

When only alpha motor neurons are stimulated, the firing of the Ia fiber from the muscle spindle pauses during contraction of the muscle because the muscle

is shortening and therefore unloading (slackening) the spindle. However, if gamma motor neurons are activated at the same time as alpha motor neurons, the pause is eliminated. The contraction of the intrafusal fibers by the gamma motor neurons keeps the spindle

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 767

for a task. The task conditions under which independent control of alpha and gamma motor neurons occurs in humans have not yet been clearly established. The Stretch Reflex Also Involves Polysynaptic Pathways

## The monosynaptic Ia pathway is not the only spinal reflex pathway activated when a muscle is stretched.

Type II sensory fibers from muscle spindles are also

activated. These discharge tonically depending on

18/01/21 6:03 PM

Record afferent volley

1.6 ms


Part V / Movement

Box 32–3 The Hoffmann Reflex

## The characteristics of the monosynaptic connections from

Ia sensory fibers to spinal motor neurons in humans can

be studied using an important technique introduced in the

1950s and based on early work by Paul Hoffmann. This technique involves electrically stimulating the Ia sensory fibers in a peripheral nerve and recording the reflex electromyogram (EMG) response in the homonymous muscle. The response is known as the Hoffmann reflex, or H-reflex. The H-reflex is readily measured in the soleus muscle, an ankle extensor. The Ia fibers from the soleus and its synergists are excited by an electrode placed above the

tibial nerve behind the knee (Figure 32–4A). The response recorded from the soleus muscle depends on stimulus strength. At low stimulus strengths, a pure H-reflex is evoked, for the threshold for activation of the Ia fibers is lower than the threshold for motor axons. Increasing the stimulus strength excites the motor axons innervating the soleus, producing two successive responses.

Figure 32–4 The Hoffmann reflex.

A. The Hoffmann reflex (H-reflex) is evoked by electrically

stimulating Ia sensory fibers from muscle spindles. The

sensory fibers excite alpha motor neurons, which in turn

activate the muscle. When a mixed nerve is used, the motor neurons axons may also be activated directly. B. At intermediate stimulus strengths, an M-wave precedes the H-wave (H-reflex) in the electromyogram (EMG). C. As the stimulus strength increases, the orthodromic

- motor neuron spikes generated reflexively by the spindle sensory fibers are obliterated by antidromic spikes initi-
- ated by the electrical stimulus in the same motor axons. (Adapted, with permission, from Schieppati 1987. Copyright © 1987. Published by Elsevier Ltd.)

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 768

The first results from direct activation of the motor

axons, and the second is the H-reflex evoked by stimula-

tion of the Ia fibers (Figure 32–4B). These two compo-

nents of the evoked EMG are called the M-wave and H-wave. The H-wave occurs later because it results from signals that travel to the spinal cord, across a synapse, and back again to the muscle. The M-wave, in contrast, results from direct stimulation of the motor axon inner -vating the muscle. As the stimulus strength is increased still further, the M-wave continues to become larger and the H-wave progressively declines (Figure 32–4C). The

decline in the H-wave amplitude occurs because action potentials in the motor axons propagate toward the cell body (antidromic conduction) and cancel reflexively evoked action potentials in the same motor axons. At very high stimulus strengths, only the M-wave persists. A Sensory

Stimulus

<!-- image -->

18/01/21 6:03 PM

A Sustained stretch of muscle Muscle spindle

tivity to muscle length. (Adapted, with permission, from Hunt

and Kuffler 1951.) A. Sustained tension elicits steady firing in the Ia sensory fiber from the muscle spindle (the two muscle fibers are shown separately for illustration only).

<!-- image -->

- B. A characteristic pause occurs in the discharge of the Ia fiber when the alpha motor neuron is stimulated, causing a brief
2. muscle length and gamma motor neuron activity

(Box 32–1) and connect to different populations of excita-

tory and inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord.

Some of the interneurons project directly to the spinal motor neurons, whereas others have more indirect connections. Because of the slower conduction velocity

of type II sensory fibers and the signal relay through interneurons, the muscular responses elicited by group II fibers are smaller, more variable, and delayed compared to the monosynaptic stretch reflex. Some of the interneurons activated by group II fibers send

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 769

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord

contraction of the muscle. The Ia fiber stops firing because

C. Gamma motor neurons innervate the contractile polar

regions of the intrafusal fibers of muscle spindles (see Figure 32–2A). If a gamma motor neuron is stimulated at

the same time as the alpha motor neuron, the spindle is not unloaded during the contraction. As a result, the pause in discharge of the Ia sensory fiber that occurs when only the alpha motor neuron is stimulated is "filled in" by the response of the fiber to stimulation of the gamma motor neuron. axons across the midline of the spinal cord and give

rise to crossed reflexes. Such connections that cross

the midline are important for coordination of bilateral

muscle activity in functional motor tasks. Golgi Tendon Organs Provide Force-Sensitive Feedback to the Spinal Cord

## Stimulation of Golgi tendon organs or their Ib sensory fibers in passive animals produces disynaptic

inhibition of homonymous motor neurons (autogenic

18/01/21 6:03 PM



Part V / Movement

<!-- image -->

neurons are active during activities in which muscle length

changes slowly and predictably. Dynamic gamma motor inhibition) and excitation of antagonist motor neurons

(reciprocal excitation). Thus, these effects are the exact

opposite of the responses evoked by muscle stretch or

stimulation of Ia sensory axons. This autogenic inhibition is mediated by Ib inhibitory interneurons. These inhibiting interneurons receive their principal input from Golgi tendon organs, sen-

sory receptors that signal the tension in a muscle (Box 32–4), and they make inhibitory connections with homonymous motor neurons. However, stimulation of the Ib sensory fibers from tendon organs in active animals does not always inhibit homonymous motor neurons. Indeed, as we shall see later, stimulation of tendon organs may in certain conditions excite homonymous motor neurons. One reason that the reflex actions of the sensory axons from tendon organs are complex in natural situations is that the Ib inhibitory interneurons also receive

input from the muscle spindles, cutaneous receptors, and joint receptors (Figure 32–8A). In addition, they receive both excitatory and inhibitory input from various descending pathways. Golgi tendon organs were first thought to have a protective function, preventing damage to muscle. It was assumed that they always inhibited homonymous

motor neurons and that they fired only when tension in the muscle was high. We now know that these receptors signal minute changes in muscle tension, thus providing the nervous system with precise information about the state of a muscle's contraction.

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 770

sion, from Prochazka et al. 1988.)

The convergent sensory input from tendon organs,

cutaneous receptors, and joint receptors to the Ib inhib-

itory interneurons (Figure 32–8A) may allow for pre-

cise spinal control of muscle force in activities such as grasping a delicate object. Additional input from cutaneous receptors may facilitate activity in the Ib inhibitory interneurons when the hand reaches an object, thus reducing the level of muscle contraction and permitting a soft grasp. As is the case with the Ia fibers from muscle spindles, the Ib fibers from tendon organs form widespread connections with motor neurons that innervate mus -

cles acting at different joints. Therefore, the connections of the sensory fibers from tendon organs with the Ib inhibitory interneurons are part of spinal networks that regulate movements of whole limbs. Cutaneous Reflexes Produce Complex Movements That Serve Protective and Postural Functions

## Most reflex pathways involve interneurons. One such reflex pathway is that of the flexion-withdrawal reflex,

in which a limb is quickly withdrawn from a painful

stimulus. Flexion-withdrawal is a protective reflex in which a discrete stimulus causes all the flexor muscles in that limb to contract coordinately. We know that this is a spinal reflex because it persists after complete transection of the spinal cord. The sensory signal of the flexion-withdrawal reflex activates divergent polysynaptic reflex pathways. One

18/01/21 6:03 PM

Beam

walking

+ +

+ +

Box 32–4 Golgi Tendon Organs

## Golgi tendon organs are slender encapsulated struc-

tures approximately 1 mm long and 0.1 mm in diameter

located at the junction between skeletal muscle fibers

and tendon. Each capsule encloses several braided collagen fibers connected in series to a group of muscle fibers. Each tendon organ is innervated by a single Ib axon that branches into many fine endings inside the capsule; these endings become intertwined with the collagen fas-

cicles (Figure 32–7A). Stretching of the tendon organ straightens the collagen fibers, thus compressing the Ib nerve endings and causing them to fire. Because the nerve endings are so

A

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord

closely associated with the collagen fibers, even very small

stretches of the tendons can compress the nerve endings.

Whereas muscle spindles are most sensitive to

changes in length of a muscle, tendon organs are most sensitive to changes in muscle tension. Contraction of

the muscle fibers connected to the collagen fiber bundle containing the receptor is a particularly potent stimulus to a tendon organ. The tendon organs are thus readily activated during normal movements. This has been demonstrated by recordings from single Ib axons in humans making voluntary finger movements and in cats walking normally. Studies in anesthetized animal preparations have shown that the average level of activity in the population of tendon organs in a muscle is a good index of the

total force in a contracting muscle (Figure 32–7B). This close agreement between firing frequency, and force is consistent with the view that the tendon organs continuously measure the force in a contracting muscle. Muscle bers B

Capsule

Tendon

250 µm

afferent axon is compressed by collagen fibers (see

Ib afferent

axon

enlargement) and its rate of firing increases.  (Adapted, with permission, from Schmidt 1983; inset adapted, with permission, from Swett and Schoultz 1975.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


Linear regression lines show the relationship between

discharge rate and force for Golgi tendon organs of the soleus muscle of the cat. (Adapted, with permission, from Crago, Houk, and Rymer 1982.)

excites motor neurons that innervate flexor muscles of

the stimulated limb, whereas another inhibits motor

neurons that innervate the limb's extensor muscles

(Figure 32–1B). This reflex can produce an opposite effect in the contralateral limb, that is, excitation of extensor motor neurons and inhibition of flexor motor neurons. This crossed-extension reflex serves to enhance postural support during withdrawal of a foot from a

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 771

painful stimulus. Activation of the extensor muscles in

the opposite leg counteracts the increased load caused

by lifting the stimulated limb. Thus, flexion-withdrawal

is a complete, albeit simple, motor act. Although flexion reflexes are relatively stereotyped, both the spatial extent and the force of muscle contraction depend on stimulus intensity. Touching

a stove that is slightly hot may produce moderately

18/01/21 6:03 PM




Part V / Movement

A Convergence onto Ib interneurons B Reversal of action of Ib afferents Resting

## Ib afferent

## Ib afferent

A. The Ib inhibitory interneuron receives input from tendon

organs, muscle spindles (not shown), joint and cutaneous receptors, and descending pathways.

<!-- image -->

B. The action of Ib sensory fibers on extensor motor neurons is reversed from inhibition to excitation when walking is initiated. When the animal is resting, stimulation of Ib fibers

fast withdrawal only at the wrist and elbow, whereas

touching a very hot stove invariably leads to a force-

ful contraction at all joints, leading to rapid with-

drawal of the entire limb. The duration of the reflex usually increases with stimulus intensity, and the contractions produced in a flexion reflex always outlast the stimulus. Because of the similarity of the flexion-withdrawal reflex to stepping, it was once thought that the flexion reflex is important in producing contractions of flexor

muscles during walking. We now know, however, that a major component of the neural control system for walking is a set of intrinsic spinal circuits that do not require sensory stimuli (Chapter 33). Nevertheless, in mammals, the intrinsic spinal circuits that control

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 772

4 mV

100 ms

by the hyperpolarization in the record. During walking, the

Ib inhibitory interneurons are inhibited while excitatory interneurons that receive input from Ib sensory fibers are facilitated by the command system for walking, thus opening a Ib excitatory pathway from the Golgi tendon organs to motor neurons.

walking share many of the interneurons involved in

flexion reflexes.

Convergence of Sensory Inputs on Interneurons Increases the Flexibility of Reflex Contributions

to Movement

## The Ib inhibitory interneuron is not the only interneuron that receives convergent input from many different

sensory modalities. An enormous diversity of sensory

information converges on interneurons in the spinal cord, enabling them to integrate information from muscle, joints, and skin. Interneurons activated by groups I and II sensory fibers have received special attention. It was thought

18/01/21 6:03 PM

for some time that excitatory and inhibitory interneu-

rons activated by group II fibers could be distinguished

from those activated by group Ib afferents, but it is

now believed that this distinction has to be abandoned and that groups I and II fibers converge on common populations of interneurons that integrate force and length information from the active muscle and thereby help coordinate muscle activity according to the length of the muscle, its activity level, and the external load. Sensory Feedback and Descending Motor

Commands Interact at Common Spinal

Neurons to Produce Voluntary Movements

## As pointed out by Michael Foster in his 1879 physiology textbook, it must be an "economy to the body" that

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord


form closed feedback loops. For example, stretching a

muscle increases activity in spindle sensory afferents,

leading to muscle contraction and consequent short-

ening of the muscle. Muscle shortening in turn leads to decreased activity in spindle afferents, reduction of muscle contraction, and lengthening of the muscle. The stretch reflex loop thus acts continuously— the output of the system, a change in muscle length, becomes the input—tending to keep the muscle close

to a desired or reference length. The stretch reflex pathway is a negative feedback system, or servomechanism, because it tends to counteract or reduce deviations from the reference value of the regulated variable. In 1963, Ragnar Granit proposed that the reference value in voluntary movements is set by descending signals that act on both alpha and gamma motor

the will should make use of the networks in the spinal

cord to generate coordinated movements "rather than it should have recourse to an apparatus of its own of a similar kind." Research in the subsequent 140 years has confirmed this conjecture. The first evidence came from intracellular record ings of synaptic potentials elicited in cat spinal motor neurons by combined and separate stimulation of sen-

sory fibers and descending pathways. When separate stimuli are reduced in intensity to just below threshold for evoking a synaptic potential, combining the stimulations at appropriate intervals makes the synaptic potential reappear. This provides evidence of convergence of the sensory fibers and the descending pathways onto common interneurons in the reflex pathway (see Figure 13–14). Direct recordings from spinal interneurons have confirmed this, as have noninvasive Hoffmann reflex tests in human subjects (Figure 32–9). Direct evidence that sensory feedback helps to shape voluntary motor commands through spinal reflex networks in humans comes from experiments in which

-neurons. The rate of firing of alpha motor neurons is set to produce the desired shortening of the muscle, and the rate of firing of gamma motor neurons is set to produce an equivalent shortening of the intrafusal fibers of the muscle spindle. If the shortening of the whole muscle is less than what is required by a task, as when the load is greater than anticipated, the sensory fibers increase their firing rate because the contracting intrafusal fibers are stretched (loaded) by the relatively greater length of the whole muscle. If shortening is greater than necessary, the sensory fibers decrease their firing rate because the intrafusal fibers are relatively slackened (unloaded) (Figure 32–10A). In theory, this mechanism could permit the nervous system to produce movements of a given distance without having to know in advance the actual load or

sensory activity in length- and force-sensitive afferents has suddenly been reduced or abolished. This can be done by suddenly unloading or shortening a muscle during a voluntary contraction. The short latency of the consequent reduction in muscle activity can only be explained by sensory activity through a reflex pathway that directly contributes to the muscle activity. Muscle Spindle Sensory Afferent Activity Reinforces Central Commands for Movements weight being moved. In practice, however, the stretch reflex pathways do not have sufficient control over motor neurons to overcome large unexpected loads. This is immediately obvious if we consider what happens when we attempt to lift a heavy suitcase that we believe to be empty. Automatic compensation for the greater-than-anticipated load does not occur. Instead, we have to pause briefly to plan a new movement with much greater muscle activation. Strong evidence that alpha and gamma motor neurons are co-activated during voluntary human movement comes from direct measurements of the activity

Through the Ia Monosynaptic Reflex Pathway

## Stretch reflex pathways can contribute to the regulation of motor neurons during voluntary movements and during maintenance of posture because they

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 773

of the sensory fibers from muscle spindles. In the late 
Å y p
1960s, Åke Vallbo and Karl-Erik Hagbarth developed microneurography, a technique for recording from the largest afferent fibers in peripheral nerves. Vallbo later found that during slow movements of the fingers the large-diameter Ia fibers from spindles in the contracting muscles increase their rate of firing even when the muscle shortens as it contracts (Figure 32–10B). This occurs because the gamma motor neurons, which have

18/01/21 6:03 PM


Part V / Movement

A

Corticospinal

tract Stimulus

works are integrated.  This technique was introduced originally Motor neuron response IPSP

<!-- image -->

for investigation of spinal circuits in the cat in the 1950s, but it is also the basis of later investigations of the human spinal mechanisms of motor control. It relies on the spatial summation of synaptic inputs (see Figure 13–14), as illustrated here using the reciprocal Ia inhibitory pathway and corticospinal tract (CST). A. The diagram shows the experimental setups for testing for convergence of excitatory reciprocal Ia and corticospinal pathways onto Ia inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord. B. In acute experiments on the cat spinal cord, supramaximal stimuli were applied separately to corticospinal fiber tracts (1) and Ia axons (3); each stimulus elicited an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) in the motor neuron. Next, the intensities of the two stimuli were reduced to just submaximal levels, at which point each pathway failed to elicit an IPSP in the motor neuron (2 , 4). Then, when the two sets of submaximal stimuli were paired, they elicited an IPSP in the motor neuron (5), leading to the conclusion that the two input pathways converge on

direct excitatory connections with spindles, are co-

activated with alpha motor neurons.

Furthermore, when subjects attempt to make slow

movements at a constant velocity, the firing of the Ia fibers mirrors the small deviations in velocity in the

trajectory of the movements (sometimes the muscle

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 774

C. In humans, direct intracellular recording from interneurons

and motor neurons is not possible, but recording of H-reflexes (Box 32–4, Figure 32–4) and transcutaneous stimulation of the

,

corticospinal tract have provided indirect evidence for convergence similar to that demonstrated in cats (see part B). The electromyogram (EMG) record of the H-reflex provides a measure of the excitability of the spinal motor neurons (1). When the CST and antagonist Ia fibers were stimulated separately at supramaximal levels, the H-reflex amplitude was diminished due to the compound IPSPs elicited in the motor neurons (2 , 4). Next, the stimuli to these two excitatory pathways to the inhibitory interneurons were reduced until neither stimulus alone elicited a reduction in amplitude of the H-reflex (3 Then, the two submaximal stimuli were timed to produce synchronous subthreshold excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in the inhibitory interneurons (6). Because this protocol caused suppression of the H-reflex, one may conclude that the CST and Ia afferents converge on the same Ia inhibitory interneurons.

5).

shortens quickly and at other times more slowly).

When the velocity of flexion increases transiently,

the rate of firing in the fibers decreases because the

muscle is shortening more rapidly and therefore exerts less tension on the intrafusal fibers. When the veloc -ity decreases, firing increases because the muscle is

18/01/21 6:03 PM

B

Stimulation of CST and Ia bers

AP

A Alpha-gamma co-activation reinforces alpha motor activity

Cortical

motor

command

<!-- image -->

EMG

Finger

<!-- image -->

neurons.

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord


shortening more slowly, and therefore, the relative ten-

sion on the intrafusal fibers increases. This information

can be used by the nervous system to compensate for

irregularities in the movement trajectory by exciting the alpha motor neurons. Modulation of Ia inhibitory Interneurons and Renshaw Cells by Descending Inputs Coordinate

Muscle Activity at Joints

## Reciprocal innervation is useful not only in stretch reflexes but also in voluntary movements. Relaxation of the antagonist muscle during a movement enhances

speed and efficiency because the muscles that act as prime movers are not working against the contraction of opposing muscles. The Ia inhibitory interneurons receive inputs from collaterals of the axons of neurons in the motor cor -tex that make direct excitatory connections with spinal

motor neurons. This organizational feature simplifies the control of voluntary movements, because higher centers do not have to send separate commands to the opposing muscles. It is sometimes advantageous to contract both the prime mover and the antagonist at the same time. Such co-contraction has the effect of stiffening the joint

and is most useful when precision and joint stabilization are critical. An example of this phenomenon is the co-contraction of flexor and extensor muscles of the elbow immediately before catching a ball. The Ia inhibitory interneurons receive both excitatory and inhibitory signals from all of the major descending pathways (Figure 32–11A). By changing the balance of excitatory and inhibitory inputs onto these interneurons, supraspinal centers can modulate reciprocal inhibition of muscles and enable co-contraction, thus controlling the relative amount of joint stiffness to meet the requirements of the motor act. The activity of spinal motor neurons is also regulated by another important class of inhibitory interneurons, the Renshaw cells. Excited by collaterals of the

A. Co-activation of alpha and gamma motor neurons by a

cortical motor command allows feedback from muscle spindles to reinforce activation in the alpha motor neurons. Any

disturbance during a movement alters the length of the muscle and thus changes the activity in the sensory fibers from the spindles. The changed spindle input to the alpha motor neuron compensates for the disturbance. B. The discharge rate in the Ia sensory fiber from a spindle increases during slow flexion of a finger. This increase depends on alpha-gamma co-activation. If the gamma motor neurons

were not active, the spindle would slacken, and its discharge rate would decrease as the muscle shortened. (EMG, elec tromyogram; PPS, pulses/s) (Adapted, with permission, from Vallbo 1981.)

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 775

-axons of motor neurons and receiving significant synaptic input from descending pathways, Renshaw cells make inhibitory synaptic connections with several populations of motor neurons, including the motor neurons that excite them, as well as Ia inhibitory interneurons (Figure 32–11B). The connections with motor neurons form a negative feedback system that regulates the firing rate of the motor neurons, whereas the connections with the Ia inhibitory interneurons regulate the strength of inhibition of antagonistic motor neurons, for instance in relation to co-contraction of antagonists. The distribution of projections from Renshaw

18/01/21 6:03 PM

+

+

Gamma

motor

neuron

Spindle

0.2 mV



°


°

50 pps
A Alpha-gamma co-activation reinforces alpha motor activity

Cortical

motor

command

<!-- image -->

EMG

Finger

<!-- image -->

neurons.

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord


shortening more slowly, and therefore, the relative ten-

sion on the intrafusal fibers increases. This information

can be used by the nervous system to compensate for

irregularities in the movement trajectory by exciting the alpha motor neurons. Modulation of Ia inhibitory Interneurons and Renshaw Cells by Descending Inputs Coordinate

Muscle Activity at Joints

## Reciprocal innervation is useful not only in stretch reflexes but also in voluntary movements. Relaxation of the antagonist muscle during a movement enhances

speed and efficiency because the muscles that act as prime movers are not working against the contraction of opposing muscles. The Ia inhibitory interneurons receive inputs from collaterals of the axons of neurons in the motor cor -tex that make direct excitatory connections with spinal

motor neurons. This organizational feature simplifies the control of voluntary movements, because higher centers do not have to send separate commands to the opposing muscles. It is sometimes advantageous to contract both the prime mover and the antagonist at the same time. Such co-contraction has the effect of stiffening the joint

and is most useful when precision and joint stabilization are critical. An example of this phenomenon is the co-contraction of flexor and extensor muscles of the elbow immediately before catching a ball. The Ia inhibitory interneurons receive both excitatory and inhibitory signals from all of the major descending pathways (Figure 32–11A). By changing the balance of excitatory and inhibitory inputs onto these interneurons, supraspinal centers can modulate reciprocal inhibition of muscles and enable co-contraction, thus controlling the relative amount of joint stiffness to meet the requirements of the motor act. The activity of spinal motor neurons is also regulated by another important class of inhibitory interneurons, the Renshaw cells. Excited by collaterals of the

A. Co-activation of alpha and gamma motor neurons by a

cortical motor command allows feedback from muscle spindles to reinforce activation in the alpha motor neurons. Any

disturbance during a movement alters the length of the muscle and thus changes the activity in the sensory fibers from the spindles. The changed spindle input to the alpha motor neuron compensates for the disturbance. B. The discharge rate in the Ia sensory fiber from a spindle increases during slow flexion of a finger. This increase depends on alpha-gamma co-activation. If the gamma motor neurons

were not active, the spindle would slacken, and its discharge rate would decrease as the muscle shortened. (EMG, elec tromyogram; PPS, pulses/s) (Adapted, with permission, from Vallbo 1981.)

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 775

-axons of motor neurons and receiving significant synaptic input from descending pathways, Renshaw cells make inhibitory synaptic connections with several populations of motor neurons, including the motor neurons that excite them, as well as Ia inhibitory interneurons (Figure 32–11B). The connections with motor neurons form a negative feedback system that regulates the firing rate of the motor neurons, whereas the connections with the Ia inhibitory interneurons regulate the strength of inhibition of antagonistic motor neurons, for instance in relation to co-contraction of antagonists. The distribution of projections from Renshaw

18/01/21 6:03 PM

+

+

Gamma

motor

neuron

Spindle

0.2 mV



°


°

50 pps



Part V / Movement

A Ia inhibitory interneuron

Corticospinal

pathway

<!-- image -->

reflex actions.

A. The Ia inhibitory interneuron regulates contraction in antago-

nist muscles in stretch reflex circuits through its divergent contacts with motor neurons. In addition, the interneuron

receives excitatory and inhibitory inputs from corticospinal and other descending pathways. A change in the balance of these supraspinal signals allows the interneuron to coordinate cocontractions in antagonist muscles at a joint. cells to different motor nuclei also facilitate that muscle

activity is coordinated in functional synergies during

movement.

Transmission in Reflex Pathways May Be Facilitated or Inhibited by Descending Motor Commands

## As we have seen, in an animal at rest, the Ib sensory fibers from extensor muscles have an inhibitory effect on homonymous motor neurons. During locomotion,

they produce an excitatory effect on those same motor neurons because transmission in the disynaptic inhibitory pathway is depressed (Figure 32–8B), while at the same time transmission through excitatory interneurons is facilitated. This phenomenon, called state-dependent reflex reversal, illustrates how transmission in spinal circuit is regulated by descending motor commands to meet

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 776

Ia inhibitory

interneuron

Motor

neurons

Extensor

muscle

B. The Renshaw cell produces recurrent inhibition of motor

neurons. These interneurons are excited by collaterals from

motor neurons and inhibit those same motor neurons. This

negative feedback system regulates motor neuron excitability and stabilizes firing rates. Renshaw cells also send collaterals to synergist motor neurons (not shown) and Ia inhibitory interneurons that synapse on antagonist motor neurons. Thus, descending inputs that modulate the excitability of the Renshaw cells adjust the excitability of all the motor neurons that control movement around a joint. the changing requirements during movement. By

favoring transmission through excitatory pathways

from the load-sensitive Golgi tendon organs, the

descending motor commands ensure that feedback from the active muscles automatically facilitates the activation of the muscles, thereby greatly simplifying the task for supraspinal centers. State-dependent reflex reversal has also been demonstrated in humans. Stimulation of skin and muscle afferents from the foot produces facilitation of mus-

cles that lift the foot early in the swing phase, but suppresses activity of the same muscles late in the swing phase. Both effects make good functional sense. Early in the swing phase, positive feedback from the foot will help to lift the foot over an obstacle, whereas suppression of the same muscles in late swing will help to lower the foot quickly to the ground so that the obstacle may be passed using the opposite leg first.

18/01/21 6:03 PM

B Renshaw cell Descending Inputs Modulate Sensory Input to the Spinal Cord by Changing the Synaptic Efficiency of Primary Sensory Fibers

## In the 1950s and early 1960s, John C. Eccles and his collaborators demonstrated that monosynaptic excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) elicited in cat spi-

nal motor neurons by stimulation of Ia sensory fibers become smaller when other Ia fibers are stimulated. This led to the discovery in the spinal cord of several groups of GABAergic inhibitory interneurons that exert presynaptic inhibition of primary sensory neurons (Figure 32–12). Some interneurons inhibit mainly Ia sensory axons, whereas others inhibit mainly Ib axons or sensory fibers from skin. The principal mechanism responsible for sensory inhibition is a depolarization of the primary terminal caused by an inward Cl − current when GABAergic

receptors on the terminal are activated. This depolarization inactivates some of the Na + channels in the terminal, so the action potentials that reach the synapse are reduced in size. The effect of this is that release of neurotransmitter from the sensory afferent is diminished. When tested by stimulation of peripheral afferents, presynaptic inhibition is widespread in the spinal cord and affects primary afferents from all muscles

in a limb. However, similar to other interneurons, the neurons responsible for presynaptic inhibition are also controlled by descending pathways, making possible a much more focused modulation of presynaptic inhibition in relation to movement. Presynaptic inhibition at the synapse of Ia axons with motor neurons of the muscles that are activated as part of a movement is reduced at the onset of movement. In contrast, presynaptic inhibition of Ia axons on motor neurons connected to inactive muscles is increased. One example of this selective modulation is increased presynaptic inhibition of Ia axons at their synapse with antagonist motor neurons, which explains part of the reduction of stretch reflexes in antagonist muscles at the onset of agonist contraction. In this way, the nervous system takes advantage of the widespread connectivity of Ia axons, using presynaptic inhibition to shape activity in the Ia afferent network to facilitate activation of specific muscles. Presynaptic inhibition provides a mechanism by which the nervous system can reduce sensory feedback predicted by the motor command, while allow- Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord Ia afferent bers

<!-- image -->

ing unexpected feedback access to the spinal motor circuit and the rest of the nervous system. In line with this function, presynaptic inhibition of Ia sensory axons from muscle spindles generally increases during

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 777

inputs contributes to generation of coordinated limb

movements.  Inhibitory interneurons (blue) activated by descending inputs can have either pre- or postsynaptic effects. Some interneurons releasing the inhibitory neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) form axo-axonic synapses with the primary sensory fibers. The principal inhibitory mechanism involves activation of GABAergic receptors on the terminals of the presynaptic Ia sensory axons, resulting in depolarization of the terminals and reduced transmitter release. Such presynaptic inhibition is widely distributed in the spinal cord. Stimulation of Ia sensory fibers from one flexor muscle may elicit presynaptic inhibition of both flexor and extensor Ia axon terminals on motor neurons innervating muscles throughout the limb. However, several different populations of interneurons mediating presynaptic inhibition exist, which allows a very specific regulation of presynaptic inhibition in relation to voluntary movements. Interaction of sensory inputs with descending motor commands in the corticospinal tract may thus decrease presynaptic inhibition of Ia axon terminals on agonist motor neurons (eg, anterior tibial motor neurons) and at the same time increase presynaptic inhibition of Ia terminals on antagonist motor neurons (eg, soleus motor neurons). Regulation of presynaptic inhibition may thus simultaneously facilitate the sensory feedback to the activation of agonist motor neurons and at the same time diminish the risk that stretch of the antagonist muscles will elicit a stretch reflex that would counteract the movement.

18/01/21 6:03 PM



Part V / Movement

movements that are highly predictable, such as walk-

ing and running.

Finally, presynaptic inhibition may help stabilize

the execution of movements by preventing excessive sensory feedback and associated self-reinforcing oscil-

latory activity. Part of the Descending Command for Voluntary

Movements Is Conveyed Through Spinal

Interneurons

## In cats as well as most other vertebrates, the corticospinal tract has no direct connections to spinal

motor neurons; all the descending commands have

to be channeled through spinal interneurons that are also part of reflex pathways. Humans and Old World monkeys are the only species in which corticospinal neurons make direct connections with the spinal motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. Even in these species, a considerable fraction of the corticospinal tract fibers terminate in the intermediate nucleus on spinal interneurons, and the corticospinal fibers that terminate on motor neurons also have collaterals that synapse on interneurons. A considerable part of each descending command for movement in the corticospinal tract therefore has to be conveyed through spinal interneurons—and integrated with sensory activity—before reaching the motor neurons. Propriospinal Neurons in the C3–C4 Segments

Mediate Part of the Corticospinal Command for

Movement of the Upper Limb Corticospinal pathways

cervical motor neurons. Some corticospinal fibers (green) send collaterals to propriospinal neurons in the C3–C4 segments (blue). These C3 –C –C4 propriospinal neurons project to motor neurons located in more caudal cervical segments. They also receive excitatory input from muscle afferents and send collaterals to the lateral reticular nucleus. In the 1970s, Anders Lundberg and his collaborators demonstrated that a group of neurons in the C3 – C4 spinal segments of the cat spinal cord send their axons – C4

<!-- image -->

to motor neurons located in more caudal cervical segments (Figure 32–13). Since the neurons in the C3 segments project to motor neurons that innervate a range of forelimb muscles controlling different joints, and receive input from both skin and muscles throughout the forelimb, they are named propriospinal neurons . In addition to sensory input from skin and muscle afferents, the C3 – C4 propriospinal neurons are activated by collaterals from the corticospinal tract and thereby relay disynaptic excitation from the motor cortex to the spinal motor neurons. Subsequent experiments by Bror Alstermark in Sweden and Tadashi Isa in Japan have confirmed that similar propriospinal neurons also exist in the C3

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 778

segments of the monkey spinal cord and are involved

in mediating at least part of the motor command for

reaching. Noninvasive experiments have also pro-

– C4 vided indirect evidence of the existence of C3 – C4 pro -priospinal neurons in the human spinal cord. With the evolution of direct monosynaptic corticomotor connections in monkeys and humans, the corticospinal transmission through this disynaptic pathway may have become less important.

18/01/21 6:03 PM

C1 - C2

C3 - C4

C6 - T1

Lumbar interneurons that receive input from

groups I and II sensory axons from muscle also receive

significant input from descending motor tracts and

provide excitatory projections to spinal motor neurons. These interneurons thus convey part of the indirect motor command for voluntary movements to the spinal motor neurons that control leg muscles and may be a lumbar equivalent of the C3 – C4 propriospinal neurons in the cervical spinal cord. Neurons in Spinal Reflex Pathways Are Activated Prior to Movement

## Synaptic transmission in spinal reflex pathways may change in response to the intention to move, independ-

ent of movement. Intracellular recordings from active

monkeys have demonstrated that the intention to make a movement modifies activity in interneurons in the spinal cord and alters transmission in spinal reflex pathways. Similarly, in human subjects who have been prevented from contracting a muscle (by injection of lidocaine into the peripheral nerve supplying the muscle), the voluntary effort to contract the muscle still changes transmission in reflex pathways as if the movement had actually taken place. In both humans and monkeys, spinal interneurons also change their activity well in advance of the actual movement. For example, in human subjects,

Hoffmann reflexes elicited in a muscle that is about to be activated are facilitated fully 50 ms prior to the onset of contraction and remain facilitated throughout the movement. Conversely, reflexes in the antagonist muscles are suppressed. The suppression of stretch reflexes in the antagonist muscle prior to the onset of movement is an efficient way of preventing the antagonist from being reflexively activated when it is stretched at the onset of the agonist contraction. Transmission in spinal reflex pathways can also be modified in connection with higher cognitive functions. Two examples are (1) an increase in the tendon jerk reflex

in the soleus muscle of a human subject imagining pressing a foot pedal and (2) modulation of the Hoffmann reflex in arm and leg muscles while a subject observes grasping and walking movements, respectively. Proprioceptive Reflexes Play an Important

Role in Regulating Both Voluntary and

Automatic Movements

## All movements activate receptors in muscles, joints, and skin. Sensory signals generated by the body's own

movements were termed proprioceptive by Sherrington,

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 779

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord


who proposed that they control important aspects of

normal movements. A good example is the Hering-

Breuer reflex, which regulates the amplitude of inspira-

tion. Stretch receptors in the lungs are activated during inspiration, and the Hering-Breuer reflex eventually triggers the transition from inspiration to expiration when the lungs are expanded. A similar situation exists in the walking systems of many animals; sensory signals generated near the end of the stance phase initiate the onset of the swing

phase (Chapter 33). Proprioceptive signals can also contribute to the regulation of motor activity during voluntary movements, as shown in studies of individuals with sensory neuropathy of the arms. These patients display abnormal reaching movements and have difficulty in positioning the limb accurately because the lack of proprioception results in a failure to compensate for the complex inertial properties of the human arm. Therefore, a primary function of proprioceptive reflexes in regulating voluntary movements is to adjust the motor output according to the changing bio-

mechanical state of the body and limbs. This adjustment ensures a coordinated pattern of motor activity during an evolving movement and compensates for the intrinsic variability of motor output.

Spinal Reflex Pathways Undergo

Long-Term Changes

## Transmission in spinal reflex pathways is modulated not only to suit the immediate requirements of the

movement but also to adapt the motor command to

the motor experience of the individual. For example, transmission in the reciprocal Ia inhibitory pathway shows a gradual change when subjects improve their ability in coordinating agonist and antagonist contraction. Inactivity following long periods of bedrest or immobilization also results in changes in stretch reflexes and H-reflexes. Conversely, the soleus stretch reflex is low in highly trained ballet dancers and varies among different kinds of athletes. Extensive studies of humans, monkeys, and rats by Jonathan Wolpaw and his colleagues have found that stretch reflexes can be operantly conditioned to

either increase or decrease. The mechanisms underlying these changes are complex and involve alterations at multiple sites including changes in the properties of motor neurons. A general prerequisite for these changes is that corticospinal control of the spinal motor circuits must be intact.

18/01/21 6:03 PM


Part V / Movement

Damage to the Central Nervous System

Produces Characteristic Alterations in

Reflex Responses

## Stretch reflexes are routinely used in clinical examinations of patients with neurological disorders. They are

typically elicited by sharply tapping the tendon of a

muscle with a reflex hammer. Although the responses are often called tendon reflexes or tendon jerks, the receptor that is stimulated, the muscle spindle, actually lies in the muscle rather than the tendon. Only the primary sensory fibers in the spindle participate in the tendon reflex, for these are selectively activated by a rapid stretch of the muscle produced by the tendon tap. Measuring alterations in the strength of the stretch reflex can assist in the diagnosis of certain conditions and in localizing injury or disease in the central nerv-

ous system. Absent or hypoactive stretch reflexes often indicate a disorder of one or more of the components of the peripheral reflex pathway: sensory or motor axons, the cell bodies of motor neurons, or the muscle itself (Chapter 57). Nevertheless, because the excitability of motor neurons is dependent on descending excitatory and inhibitory signals, absent or hypoactive stretch reflexes can also result from lesions of the cen tral nervous system. Hyperactive stretch reflexes, conversely, always indicate that the lesion is in the central nervous system. Interruption of Descending Pathways to the Spinal Cord Frequently Produces Spasticity is what characterizes spasticity; an active reflex con- traction occurs only during a rapid stretch, and when the muscle is held in a lengthened position, the reflex contraction subsides. Spasticity is seen following lesion of descending motor pathways caused by stroke, injuries of the brain or spinal cord, and degenerative diseases such as mul- tiple sclerosis. It is also seen in individuals with brain damage that occurs before, during, or shortly after birth, resulting in cerebral palsy . Spasticity is not seen immediately following lesions of descending pathways, but develops over days, weeks, and even months. This parallels plastic changes at multiple sites in the stretch reflex circuitry. Sensory group Ia axons release more transmitter substance when active, and the alpha motor neurons change their intrinsic properties and their morphology (dendritic sprouting and denervation hypersensitivity) so that they become more excitable. Changes in excitatory and inhibitory interneurons that project to the motor neurons also take place and probably contribute to the increased excitability. Whatever the precise mechanisms that produce spasticity, the effect is a strong facilitation of transmission in the monosynaptic reflex pathway. It is not the

## The force with which a muscle resists being lengthened depends on the muscle's intrinsic elasticity, or stiffness. Because a muscle has elastic elements in

series and parallel that resist lengthening, it behaves like a spring (Chapter 31). In addition, connective tissue in and around the muscle may also contribute to its stiffness. These elastic elements may be pathologically altered following brain and spinal cord injury and thereby cause contractures and abnormal joint positions. However, there is also a neural contribution to the resistance of a muscle to stretch; the feedback loop inherent in the stretch reflex pathway acts to resist lengthening of the muscle. Spasticity is characterized by hyperactive tendon jerks and an increase in resistance to rapid stretching of the muscle. Slow movement of a joint elicits only

-only reflex pathway affected by lesions of descending motor pathways. Pathways involving group I/II interneurons and sensory fibers from skin are also affected and exhibit the symptomatology observed in patients with central motor lesions. In the clinic, spasticity is therefore used in a broader sense and does not only relate to stretch reflex hyperexcitability. It is still debated whether reflex hyperexcitability contributes to the movement disorder following lesion of descending pathways or whether it may be a pertinent adaptation that helps to activate the muscles when descending input is diminished. Lesion of the Spinal Cord in Humans Leads to a Period of Spinal Shock Followed by Hyperreflexia

## Damage to the spinal cord can cause large changes in the strength of spinal reflexes. Each year, approximately 11,000 Americans sustain spinal cord injuries,

passive resistance, which is caused by the elastic properties of the joint, tendon, muscle, and connective tissues. As the speed of the stretch is increased, resistance to the stretch rises progressively. This phasic relation

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 780

and many more suffer from strokes. More than half of these injuries produce permanent disability, including impairment of motor and sensory functions and loss of voluntary bowel and bladder control. Approximately 250,000 people in the United States today have some permanent disability from spinal cord injury. When the spinal cord is completely transected, there is usually a period immediately after the injury when all spinal reflexes below the level of the

18/01/21 6:03 PM

transection are reduced or completely suppressed, a

condition known as spinal shock. During the course of

weeks and months, spinal reflexes gradually return,

often greatly exaggerated. For example, a light touch to the skin of the foot may elicit strong flexion withdrawal of the leg. Highlights

1. Reflexes are coordinated, involuntary motor

responses initiated by a stimulus applied to

peripheral receptors.

2. Many groups of interneurons in spinal reflex pathways are also involved in producing complex movements such as walking and transmitting vol-
2. untary commands from the brain. 3. Some components of reflex responses, particularly those involving the limbs, are mediated by supraspinal centers, such as brain stem nuclei, the
3. cerebellum, and the motor cortex. 4. Reflexes are smoothly integrated into centrally generated motor commands because of the convergence of sensory signals onto spinal and
4. supraspinal interneuronal systems involved in initiating movements. Establishing the details of these integrative events is one of the major challenges of contemporary research on sensorymotor integration in the spinal cord. 5. Because of the role of supraspinal centers in spinal reflex pathways, injury to or disease of the central nervous system often results in significant altera-
5. tions in the strength of spinal reflexes. The pattern of changes provides an important aid to diagnosis of patients with neurological disorders.

Thomas M. Jessell

Selected Reading

Alstermark B, Isa T. 2012. Circuits for skilled reaching and

grasping. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:559–578.

Baldissera F, Hultborn H, Illert M. 1981. Integration in spinal

- neuronal systems. In: JM Brookhart, VB Mountcastle, VB Brooks, SR Geiger (eds). Handbook of Physiology: The Nervous
- System, pp. 509–595. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society.

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 781

Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord


Boyd IA. 1980. The isolated mammalian muscle spindle.

Trends Neurosci 3:258–265.

Fetz EE, Perlmutter SI, Orut Y. 2000. Functions of spinal

- interneurons during movement. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:699–707.
- Jankowska E. 1992. Interneuronal relay in spinal pathways from proprioceptors. Prog Neurobiol 38:335–378. Nielsen JB. 2016. Human spinal motor control. Annu Rev
- Neurosci 39:81–101. Pierrot-Deseilligny E, Burke D. 2005. The Circuitry of the
- Human Spinal Cord. Its Role in Motor Control and Movement Disorders. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
- Prochazka A. 1996. Proprioceptive feedback and movement regulation. In: L Rowell, JT Sheperd (eds). Handbook of Physiology: Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems ,
- pp. 89–127. New York: American Physiological Society. Windhorst U. 2007. Muscle proprioceptive feedback and spinal networks. Brain Res Bull 73:155–202. Wolpaw JR. 2007. Spinal cord plasticity in acquisition
- and maintenance of motor skills. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 189:155–169.
- References

Appenteng K, Prochazka A. 1984. Tendon organ firing dur-

ing active muscle lengthening in normal cats. J Physiol

(Lond) 353:81–92.

- Brown MC, Matthews PBC. 1966. On the sub-division of the efferent fibres to muscle spindles into static and dynamic fusimotor fibres. In: BL Andrew (ed). Control and Inner-
- vation of Skeletal Muscle, pp. 18–31. Dundee, Scotland: University of St. Andrews. Crago A, Houk JC, Rymer WZ. 1982. Sampling of total muscle force by tendon organs. J Neurophysiol 47:1069–1083. Gossard JP, Brownstone RM, Barajon I, Hultborn H. 1994.
- Transmission in a locomotor-related group Ib pathway from hind limb extensor muscles in the cat. Exp Brain Res
- 98:213–228. Granit R. 1970. Basis of Motor Control. London: Academic. Hagbarth KE, Kunesch EJ, Nordin M, Schmidt R, Wallin EU. 1986. Gamma loop contributing to maximal voluntary
- contractions in man. J Physiol (Lond) 380:575–591.
- Jens Bo Nielsen Hoffmann P. 1922. Untersuchungen über die Eigenreflexe (Sehnenreflexe) menschlicher Muskeln. Berlin: Springer. Hulliger M. 1984. The mammalian muscle spindle and its cen-
- tral control. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 101:1–110. Hunt CC, Kuffler SW. 1951. Stretch receptor discharges dur-
- ing muscle contraction. J Physiol (Lond) 113:298–315. Liddell EGT, Sherrington C. 1924. Reflexes in response to
- stretch (myotatic reflexes). Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 96:212–242.
- Marsden CD, Merton PA, Morton HB. 1981. Human postural responses. Brain 104:513–534. Matthews PBC. 1972. Muscle Receptors. London: Edward
- Arnold. Mendell LM, Henneman E. 1971. Terminals of single Ia fibers:
- location, density, and distribution within a pool of 300 homonymous motoneurons. J Neurophysiol 34:171–187.

18/01/21 6:03 PM


Part V / Movement

Pearson KG, Collins DF. 1993. Reversal of the influence of

group Ib afferents from plantaris on activity in model

gastrocnemius activity during locomotor activity. J Neu-

- rophysiol 70:1009–1017. Prochazka A, Hulliger M, Trend P, Dürmüller N. 1988. Dynamic and static fusimotor set in various behavioural contexts. In: P Hnik, T Soukup, R Vejsada, J Zelena (eds).
- Mechanoreceptors: Development, Structure and Function, pp. 417–430. New York: Plenum. Schieppati M. 1987. The Hoffmann reflex: a means of assessing spinal reflex excitability and its descending control in man. Prog Neurobiol 28:345–376.
- Schmidt RF. 1983. Motor systems. In: RF Schmidt, G Thews (eds), MA Biederman-Thorson (transl). Human Physiology, pp. 81–110. Berlin: Springer.

Kandel-Ch32\_0761-0782.indd 782

Sherrington CS. 1906. Integrative Actions of the Nervous System.

New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press.

Swett JE, Schoultz TW. 1975. Mechanical transduction in

- the Golgi tendon organ: a hypothesis. Arch Ital Biol 113:374–382.
- Vallbo ÅB. 1981. Basic patterns of muscle spindle discharge in man. In: A Taylor, A Prochazka (eds). Muscle Receptors and Movement, pp. 263–275. London: Macmillan.
- Vallbo ÅB, Hagbarth KE, Torebjörk HE, Wallin BG. 1979. Somatosensory, proprioceptive, and sympathetic activity in human peripheral nerves. Physiol Rev 59:919–957.
- Wickens DD. 1938. The transference of conditioned excita -tion and conditioned inhibition form one muscle group to the antagonist muscle group. J Exp Psychol 22:101–123.

18/01/21 6:03 PM


Locomotion

Locomotion Requires the Production of a Precise and

Coordinated Pattern of Muscle Activation

The Motor Pattern of Stepping Is Organized at

## the Spinal Level The Spinal Circuits Responsible for Locomotion Can Be

## Modified by Experience Spinal Locomotor Networks Are Organized Into

Rhythm- and Pattern-Generation Circuits Somatosensory Inputs From Moving Limbs Modulate

Locomotion Proprioception Regulates the Timing and Amplitude

## of Stepping Mechanoreceptors in the Skin Allow Stepping to Adjust

to Unexpected Obstacles Supraspinal Structures Are Responsible for Initiation and

Adaptive Control of Stepping Midbrain Nuclei Initiate and Maintain Locomotion and

## Control Speed Midbrain Nuclei That Initiate Locomotion Project to

Brain Stem Neurons The Brain Stem Nuclei Regulate Posture

During Locomotion Visually Guided Locomotion Involves the Motor Cortex

Planning of Locomotion Involves the Posterior Parietal Cortex

The Cerebellum Regulates the Timing and Intensity of Descending Signals

The Basal Ganglia Modify Cortical and Brain Stem Circuits

Computational Neuroscience Provides Insights Into Locomotor Circuits

Neuronal Control of Human Locomotion Is Similar to

That of Quadrupeds Highlights

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 783


ocomotion is one of the most fundamental

of animal behaviors and is common to all mem

-

bers of the animal kingdom. As one might expect

of such an essential behavior, the neural mechanisms responsible for the basic alternating rhythmicity that underlies locomotion are highly conserved throughout the animal kingdom, from invertebrates to vertebrates, and from the early vertebrates to primates. However, while the basic locomotor-generating circuits have been conserved, the evolution of limbs, and then of ever more complex patterns of behavior, has resulted in the development of progressively more complex spinal and supraspinal circuits (Figure 33–1). Scientists have been intrigued with the neural mechanisms of locomotion since the beginning of the 20th century, when pioneering work by Charles Sher-

rington and Thomas Graham Brown showed that the isolated spinal cord of the cat is able to generate the basic aspects of locomotor activity and subsequently that this capacity was intrinsic to the spinal cord. Throughout the 20th century, major advances were made in detailing both the rhythm- and pattern-producing capacities of the spinal cord, leading ultimately to the groundbreaking concept of a central pattern generator for locomotion in the spinal cord. This single concept, more than any other, has driven research into the mechanisms underlying locomotor control since the 1970s, allowing a detailed electrophysiological examination of the neuronal mechanisms involved in the control of locomotion that is not possible for most other motor acts. Most research throughout the 20th century on the spinal mechanisms mediating locomotion was performed on the cat, which remains an important model

20/01/21 2:45 PM


Part V / Movement Visual signals Visual cortex

<!-- image -->

motion. Locomotor networks in the spinal cord—the central

pattern generators (CPGs)—generate the precise timing and patterning of locomotion. Proprioceptive sensory feedback modulates the activity of the locomotor CPG. The initiation of locomotion is mediated by neurons in the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) that project to neurons in the medial reticular formation (MRF) in the lower brain stem, which in turn for studying many aspects of locomotor control. How-

ever, the complexity of the spinal circuits in mammals

led to the search for simpler preparations that would

allow a better understanding of the synaptic connectivity and neuronal properties responsible for the generation of locomotion. This search led to the development of the lamprey and the tadpole models (Box 33–1; Figures 33–2 and 33–3). Experiments using these species have led to a detailed understanding of the neuronal circuits responsible for generating swimming. Influential work on understanding the processes underlying locomotion has also come from other experimental models, including mouse, rat, turtle, salamander, and zebrafish. More recently, the development of moleculargenetic techniques has provided a powerful tool to probe the spinal circuits responsible for locomotion in

preparations as diverse as zebrafish and mouse. These techniques have allowed researchers to explore more thoroughly both the neuronal circuits in the mammalian spinal cord responsible for rhythmic, alternating patterns of activity that define over-ground locomotion and those responsible for swimming. The rhythmic pattern of activity is only one element of the complex locomotor behavior observed in

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 784

Afferent

signals

project to the spinal cord. Descending fibers from the

vestibular nuclei, pontomedullary reticular formation, and the

red nucleus (brain stem nuclei) maintain equilibrium and

modulate the ongoing locomotor activity. Cortical activity from the posterior parietal cortex (not illustrated) and the motor cortex is involved in the planning and execution of visually guided locomotion, while the basal ganglia (not illustrated) and cerebellum are important for the selection and coordination of locomotor activity. most vertebrates, especially mammals, which have

evolved to allow them to move quickly and elegantly.

This flexibility is provided via feedback and feedfor-

ward modification of the locomotor patterns generated by spinal networks. Feedback information from the body and limbs in the form of cutaneous and proprioceptive inputs is important for regulating aspects of the locomotor

cycle, including bending of the body, stride length, and the force produced during propulsion. This information is equally critical in assuring that animals can rapidly and efficiently react to unexpected perturbations in the environment, such as when hitting a branch during walking or stepping on an unstable surface. Feedforward information from supraspinal systems modifies activity according to the goals of the animal and the environment in which it moves.

Information from defined structures in the brain stem is important for both the initiation of locomotion and for regulating general aspects of locomotor activity, including the speed of locomotion, level of muscle activity, and interlimb coupling in animals with limbs. Information from cortical structures

20/01/21 2:45 PM
Part V / Movement Visual signals Visual cortex

<!-- image -->

motion. Locomotor networks in the spinal cord—the central

pattern generators (CPGs)—generate the precise timing and patterning of locomotion. Proprioceptive sensory feedback modulates the activity of the locomotor CPG. The initiation of locomotion is mediated by neurons in the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) that project to neurons in the medial reticular formation (MRF) in the lower brain stem, which in turn for studying many aspects of locomotor control. How-

ever, the complexity of the spinal circuits in mammals

led to the search for simpler preparations that would

allow a better understanding of the synaptic connectivity and neuronal properties responsible for the generation of locomotion. This search led to the development of the lamprey and the tadpole models (Box 33–1; Figures 33–2 and 33–3). Experiments using these species have led to a detailed understanding of the neuronal circuits responsible for generating swimming. Influential work on understanding the processes underlying locomotion has also come from other experimental models, including mouse, rat, turtle, salamander, and zebrafish. More recently, the development of moleculargenetic techniques has provided a powerful tool to probe the spinal circuits responsible for locomotion in

preparations as diverse as zebrafish and mouse. These techniques have allowed researchers to explore more thoroughly both the neuronal circuits in the mammalian spinal cord responsible for rhythmic, alternating patterns of activity that define over-ground locomotion and those responsible for swimming. The rhythmic pattern of activity is only one element of the complex locomotor behavior observed in

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 784

Afferent

signals

project to the spinal cord. Descending fibers from the

vestibular nuclei, pontomedullary reticular formation, and the

red nucleus (brain stem nuclei) maintain equilibrium and

modulate the ongoing locomotor activity. Cortical activity from the posterior parietal cortex (not illustrated) and the motor cortex is involved in the planning and execution of visually guided locomotion, while the basal ganglia (not illustrated) and cerebellum are important for the selection and coordination of locomotor activity. most vertebrates, especially mammals, which have

evolved to allow them to move quickly and elegantly.

This flexibility is provided via feedback and feedfor-

ward modification of the locomotor patterns generated by spinal networks. Feedback information from the body and limbs in the form of cutaneous and proprioceptive inputs is important for regulating aspects of the locomotor

cycle, including bending of the body, stride length, and the force produced during propulsion. This information is equally critical in assuring that animals can rapidly and efficiently react to unexpected perturbations in the environment, such as when hitting a branch during walking or stepping on an unstable surface. Feedforward information from supraspinal systems modifies activity according to the goals of the animal and the environment in which it moves.

Information from defined structures in the brain stem is important for both the initiation of locomotion and for regulating general aspects of locomotor activity, including the speed of locomotion, level of muscle activity, and interlimb coupling in animals with limbs. Information from cortical structures

20/01/21 2:45 PM

Box 33–1 Preparations Used to Study the Neuronal Control of Locomotion

## The neuronal control of locomotion is studied experimentally in diverse vertebrate species that produce Semi-intact Preparations Are Commonly Used to Study the Central Control of Locomotion in

swimming or over-ground locomotion, or both. The pre-

vailing experimental models used for studying swimming are the lamprey, the tadpole, and the zebrafish; for over-ground locomotion, the cat, rat, or mouse; and for both swimming and locomotion, the turtle, salamander, and frog. Semi-intact preparations—in which influences from parts of the brain, all supraspinal inputs, and/or afferent inputs to the spinal cord have been removed—are

also commonly used in studies of the neuronal control of locomotion in vertebrates (Figure 33–2A). Finally, in vitro preparations of the spinal cord or of the brain stem and spinal cord from young animals or adult and anoxia-resistant animals are extensively used for circuit analysis (Figure 33–2C). Intact Preparations Are Used to Study the Behavioral Output

## In intact preparations, locomotion is studied either during walking over ground or on a motorized treadmill. Chronic electromyographic (EMG) recordings of limb

muscles, coupled with video recordings of the movement, reveal details of the rhythm of locomotion, the pattern of muscle or joint activation, and interlimb coordination (Figure 33–2B). Such studies allow researchers to understand how normal locomotion behavior is expressed. These behavioral studies are often combined with experimental manipulations that modify the supraspinal or afferent control of locomotion. Such experiments

may use electrical stimulation or surgical ablation of circumscribed areas in the central nervous system, genetic inactivation or activation of defined populations of nerve cells, or perturbation of the afferent input to the spinal cord using genetic techniques or electrical stimulation. Finally, single-cell activity in the brain can be recorded from identified populations of neurons and correlated with specific aspects of the locomotor behavior (eg, speed, postural adjustments, gait modifications, flexor-extensor muscle activity). Cells are identified by their anatomical location, their projection pattern, transmitter content, and molecular markers.

contributes primarily to the planning and execution

of locomotion in situations in which vision is used

to make anticipatory modifications of gait. Finally,

two structures with no direct spinal connections, the basal ganglia and the cerebellum, contribute to the

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 785

the Absence of Cortical Influence or Sensory

## Feedback Decerebrate Preparations In the decerebrate preparation, the brain stem is com-

pletely transected at the level of the midbrain (Figure

## 33–2A), disconnecting rostral brain centers, including

the cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus, from locomotorinitiating centers in the brain stem and spinal cord. These preparations allow investigation of the role of cerebellum and brain stem structures in controlling locomotion in the absence of influence from higher brain centers. Locomotion is generally evoked by electrical stimulation of locomotor regions in the brain stem, as described in the text. To increase recording stability, the

animals are often paralyzed by blocking transmission at the neuromuscular junction. When locomotion is initiated in such an immobilized preparation, often referred to as fictive locomotion, the motor nerves to flexors and extensor muscles discharge (recorded as an electroneurogram), but no movement takes place. Spinal Preparations In spinal preparations, the spinal cord is completely

transected, generally at the lower thoracic level, thus

## isolating the spinal segments that control the hindlimb

musculature from the rest of the central nervous system (Figure 33–2A). This procedure allows investigations of the spinal locomotor circuits without any influence from supraspinal structures. Two types of spinal preparation are used: acute spinal preparations, in which studies are performed immediately after the spinalization, and chronic spinal preparations, in

which the animals are allowed to recover from the surgery and are then studied over a period of time. In acute spinal preparations, locomotion is frequently induced chemically, either by intravenous administration of drugs that stimulate monoaminer-

gic and/or serotonergic receptors or by local application of glutamatergic receptor agonists. These drugs increase the excitability in the spinal locomotor circuits,

(continued)

selection of locomotor activity and to its coordina-

tion (Figure 33–1).

The way in which all of these structures interact

and permit diverse modes of locomotion is the subject of this chapter.

20/01/21 2:45 PM

Chapter 33 / Locomotion



Part V / Movement

Box 33–1 Preparations Used to Study the Neuronal Control of Locomotion (continued)

## mimicking the locomotor-initiating drive from the brain stem. Alternatively, locomotion is induced electrically, of finding better ways to improve the locomotor capability after spinal cord injury. In both young and adult cats

by stimulation of the dorsal roots or dorsal columns.

Acute spinal preparations are often paralyzed in order to increase recording stability from motor neurons and interneurons in the spinal cord, as well as to discriminate between central and peripheral effects. In chronic spinal preparations, animals are studied for weeks or months after transection, often with the aim

A Transection

Cerebral hemisphere

A. Schematic of the cat cerebral hemispheres, brain stem, and in young rodents, the hindlimb locomotor capabil- ity can often return following training but with no further treatment. In all animals, the locomotor capability is improved dramatically by drug treatments that activate the spinal central pattern generator. Electromyographic activity, together with behavioral measures, can be recorded before and after transection (Figure 33–2B).

a

′

and spinal cord showing the level of transection for spinalization (a ′ -a) and decerebration (b ′ -b). Decerebration

<!-- image -->

isolates the brain stem and spinal cord from the cerebral Locomotion Requires the Production of a Precise

and Coordinated Pattern of Muscle Activation

## Locomotion requires the production of activity in many muscles that need to be coordinated in a precise

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 786

-a isolates the lumbar spinal

B.  The electromyogram can be used to record locomotor

activity during actual movement in intact, decerebrate, or spinal animals.

rhythm and pattern. The rhythm defines the frequency

of the cyclic activity, whereas the pattern defines the

spatiotemporal activation of muscle groups within a

cycle. In swimming animals, such as the lamprey or the tadpole, locomotion is expressed as a traveling

20/01/21 2:45 PM

In Vitro Preparations Are Used to Study Central

Organization of Networks

## With in vitro preparations, the spinal cord or brain stem is removed from the animal and placed in a bath that is perfused with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (rodent, lam-

prey, and turtle) (Figure 33–2C). Alternatively, the brain stem and spinal cord are left in situ in the animal that is paralyzed or immobilized and kept in vitro (tadpole and zebrafish) (Figure 33–2D). In all cases, no rhythmic afferent inputs occur in the cord, and motor activity is recorded in peripheral nerves

C Isolated spinal cord

<!-- image -->


C. The isolated lumbar (L1–L6) spinal cord from a newborn

L2 ventral roots and extensor-related L5 ventral roots on

either side of the cord. Locomotor-like activity is induced by application of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) to the bathing solution. Flexor-extensor alternation is seen as out-of-phase activity between L2 and L5 ventral roots on the same side of the cord (1 and 4; 2 and 3), and left–right alternations are seen as out-of-phase activity between L2–L2 and L5–L5

wave of activity (Figure 33–3A) that propagates from

rostral to caudal body segments during forward pro-

gression. This pattern can be recorded as an electromy-

ogram (EMG) during locomotion in the intact animal (Figure 33–3B) and as an electroneurogram in the

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 787

Chapter 33 / Locomotion

or, more often, in the ventral roots where the motor neu-

rons have their axons leaving the spinal cord.

Locomotion is induced chemically, either by appli-

cation of glutamatergic or serotonergic receptor agonists or a combination of both, or electrically by stimulating

the brain stem or peripheral afferents. Rhythm and pattern generation, circuit connectivity, cellular properties of interneurons and motor neurons, and circuit neuromodulation are studied with conventional electrophysiological methods, imaging, and anatomical tracing, or with molecular genetic methods that allow manipulation and recording of identified populations of neurons.

D In situ spinal cord



<!-- image -->


100 ms

ventral roots on either side of the cord (1 and 2; 3 and 4).

(Adapted, with permission, from Kiehn et al. 1999; data

from O Kiehn.)

D. In vitro tadpole preparation, in which the spinal cord remains in situ, showing ventral root recordings on the right side (1) and on the left side (2 and 3). side of the spinal cord.

The swimming rhythm in the nervous system of the paralyzed animal was induced by a brief stimulation of the skin on the head. (Data from L Picton and KT Silar.)

isolated spinal cord (Figure 33–3C). Activity in more

caudal roots occurs later than that in more rostral roots,

and the activity on each side of the body is reciprocal.

In limbed animals, the pattern of muscle activity is more complex and serves to support the body as well

20/01/21 2:45 PM



Part V / Movement

A

<!-- image -->



Figure 33–3 Lamprey swimming.  The lamprey swims by

means of a wave of muscle contractions traveling down one

side of the body 180° out of phase with a similar traveling foot is off the ground and being transferred forward, and a stance phase, when the foot is in contact with the ground and propelling the body forward. Based


) dur-


on measures of changes in joint angle, each of these phases can be further divided into a period of flexion (F) followed by an initial period of extension (E ing swing and two additional periods of extension (E and E 3 ) during stance (Figure 33–4A; see below). Muscles within a single limb must be activated and coordinated in a precise spatiotemporal pattern (Figure 33–4B) so that the relative time of activation of

different muscles, the duration of their activity, and the magnitude of that activity are coordinated to meet the demands of the environment (intralimb coordination). In the hindlimb, swing is initiated by flexion of the knee produced by activation of muscles such as the semitendinosus, followed shortly by activation of hip

and ankle flexors (the F phase). The hip flexors continue to contract throughout swing, but the activity in the knee and ankle flexors is arrested as the leg extends in preparation for contact with the support surface (the E 1 phase). Activity in most extensor muscles begins at this stage, before the foot contacts the ground. This preparatory prestance phase signifies that the extensor muscle activity is centrally programmed and not simply the result of afferent feedback arising from contact of the foot with the ground. Stance begins with contact of the foot or paw with the ground. During early stance (the E 2 phase), the knee and ankle joints flex due to the acceptance

of the weight of the body, causing extensor muscles to lengthen at the same time they are contracting strongly (eccentric contraction). The spring-like yielding of these muscles as weight is accepted allows the body to move smoothly over the foot and is essential for establishing an efficient gait. During late stance (the E 3 phase), the hip, knee, and ankle all extend as the extensor muscles provide a propulsive force to move the body forward. There is also a requirement for interlimb coordination, the precise coupling between different limbs. The coupling between the four legs in quadrupeds, for exam-

wave on the opposite side (A). This pattern is evident in electromyogram recordings from four locations along the animal during normal swimming (B). A similar pattern is recorded from four ventral roots in an isolated cord (C). (Data from S Grillner.) as to transport it forward. The general unit of measure

of locomotion in limbed vertebrates is the step cycle

which is defined as the time between any two succes-

sive events (eg, foot or paw contact of a given limb). The step cycle is divided into a swing phase, when the

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 788

, ple, can vary quite substantially, dependent on both the speed of locomotion and the adopted gait (a walk, pace, trot, gallop, or bound). This is particularly true of the pattern of coupling between muscles of limbs of the same side (homolateral limbs) and for the diagonal limbs. The relation between limbs can be characterized by the phase difference, with 0 reflecting limbs that move together in phase and 0.5 limbs that move fully out of phase (ie, in opposite directions). During walking, activity between the homolateral limbs varies by a phase value of 0.25, and three legs are always in contact

20/01/21 2:45 PM

Figure 33–4 Stepping is produced

by complex patterns of contrac-

tions in leg muscles.

A.  The step cycle is divided into four phases. The flexion (F) and first extension (E 1 ) phases occur during

the swing phase, when the foot is off the ground, whereas second extension (E 2 ) and third extension (E 3 ) occur during the stance phase, when the foot contacts the ground. E 2 is charracterized by flexion at the knee and ankle as the leg begins to bear the animal's weight. The contracting knee and ankle extensor muscles lengthen during this phase. (Adapted, with permission, from Engberg and Lundberg 1969.) B. Profiles of electrical activity in some of the hind leg flexor (yellow) and extensor (blue) muscles in the

cat during stepping. Although flexor and extensor muscles are generally active during the swing and stance phases, respectively, the overall pattern of activity is complex in both timing and amplitude. (Muscles: IP , iliopsoas; LG and MG, lateral and medial gastrocnemius; PB, posterior biceps; RF, rectus femoris; Sart m Sart a, medial and anterior sartorius; SOL, soleus; ST, semitendinosus; TA, tibialis anterior; VL , VM, and VI, vastus lateralis, medialis, and intermedius.)

with the ground. During a trot, the diagonal limbs (eg,

A Four phases of the step cycle

Swing Chapter 33 / Locomotion Stance

<!-- image -->

the left hindlimb and the right forelimb) are in phase,

and the phase difference between homolateral limbs is

0.5. Phase relationships between limbs of the same girdle (ie, the forelimbs or hindlimbs) are more stable during gaits produced by activation of alternating limbs, such as a walk or trot (generally out of phase by 0.5

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 789

IP

VL/VM/VI

cycle), compared to synchronous locomotion like a gal-

lop or bound (generally in-phase)

.

The appropriate generation of the intra- and inter-

limb coordination of activity and the adaptation of these patterns of activity according to circumstance is

one of the major functions of the central nervous system during locomotion.

20/01/21 2:45 PM


Extension

Flexion

Hip

Knee

Ankle


Part V / Movement

The Motor Pattern of Stepping Is Organized

at the Spinal Level

## While the entire nervous system is necessary for an animal to produce a rich behavioral repertory, the

spinal cord is sufficient to generate both the rhythm

underlying locomotion as well as much of the specific pattern of muscle activity required for intra- and interlimb coordination. At the beginning of the 20th century, Graham Brown showed that the isolated spinal cord had the intrinsic capacity to generate a rudimentary alternat-

ing locomotor pattern around the ankle joint in the absence of sensory inputs to the spinal cord (Figure 33–5). He proposed that locomotor networks controlling flexor and extensor activity in the spinal cord were organized as half-centers such that when half of the circuit was active it would inhibit the other half. The center would be released from inhibition through some sort of synaptic or neuronal fatigue. This ground-breaking observation was mostly ignored until the mid-1960s and early 1970s, when there began a period of intense study of the mecha-

nisms by which the spinal cord could generate a rhythmical pattern of activity. Initial studies showed

Figure 33–5 Rhythmic stepping is

generated by spinal networks.  The

existence of intrinsic spinal networks that stimulation of sensory fibers in spinal cats treated with L-DOPA (a precursor of the monoamine transmit- ters dopamine and norepinephrine) and nialamide (a drug that prolongs the action of L-DOPA) could produce short sequences of rhythmic activity in flexor and extensor motor neurons. It was further found that groups of interneurons in the spinal cord were activated in a reciprocal flexor and extensor pattern. This organizational feature was consistent with Graham Brown's theory that mutually inhibiting half-centers produced the alternating burst activity in flexor and extensor motor neurons. In the half-center model, the spinal cord produces only the locomotor rhythm, while the pattern is sculpted by afferent feedback caused by the move- Transect spinal cord ment. However, this view was changed by experiments that demonstrated that a well-organized locomotor pattern could be observed in decerebrate and spinal cats walking on a treadmill after section of the dorsal roots, thus removing the afferent feedback (Figure 33–6A,B). Later experiments in chronic spinal cats in which rhythmic afferent feedback was abolished by preventing movement (Figure 33–6C) showed that spinal circuits were not only able to intrinsically produce a locomotor rhythm but could also produce some of

was first demonstrated in 1911 by Thomas Graham Brown who developed an experimental preparation in which the dorsal roots were cut so that sen -sory information from the limb could not reach the spinal cord. The lower figure shows an original record from Graham Brown's study. Rhythmic alternating contractions of an ankle flexor (tibialis anterior) and an ankle extensor (gastrocnemius) are generated by the isolated spinal cord and persist for some time after the transection.

(dorsal roots cut)

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 790


20/01/21 2:45 PM

A Decerebrate, deafferented, walking

ILG

<!-- image -->

B Spinal, deafferented, walking

IQ

<!-- image -->


Descending signals

Chapter 33 / Locomotion

C Chronic spinal, paralyzed

rST

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


A. Even after removal of all sensory input to the spinal cord by


Motor

pattern

Afferent

signals

C. Fictive locomotion in a chronic spinal paralyzed cat, demon-

cutting the dorsal roots, a decerebrate cat walking on a treadmill exhibits a complex motor pattern that is not just a simple

alternation of flexor and extensor activity. (Abbreviations: l, left; EDB, extensor digitorum brevis; LG, lateral gastrocnemius; IP, iliopsoas; ST, semitendinosus.) (Adapted, with permission, from Grillner and Zangger 1984.) B. Intravenous injection of L-DOPA and nialamide produces a well-organized locomotor pattern in an acute spinal cat with the dorsal roots cut. (Abbreviation: l, left; Q, quadriceps;

the spatiotemporal details of the pattern of activity

observed in the intact cat (Figure 33–6C).

These observations led to the important concept

of a central pattern generator (CPG) that can generate both the rhythm and the pattern, independent of sen-

sory inputs. Subsequent experiments led to the idea that separate components of the CPG are responsible for generating the underlying rhythm of locomotion within a limb and the spatiotemporal pattern of muscle action in the limb (Figure 33–6D). This notion was based on the observation that changes in rhythm and pattern can be influenced independently. Other studies have led to the concept that the CPG is modular,

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 791

- strating the typical pattern of activity in the semitendinosus, tibialis anterior (TA), lateral gastrocnemius (LG), and sartorius

(Sart) muscles in intact cats. (l, left; r, right.) (Adapted from Pearson and Rossignol 1991.) D. Conceptual model of a spinal locomotor central pattern generator (CPG) based on studies in decerebrate cats. The CPG model is formed of separate rhythm- and pattern-

allowing independent control of activity around differgenerating layers. Each of these layers can be modified by descending inputs and peripheral afferent information. (Adapted from Rybak et al. 2006.)

ent joints.

Experiments in a variety of species have suggested

that there are probably separate CPGs for each limb. For example, experiments using split belts, in which either

the fore- and hindlimbs or the left and right limbs walk on separate treadmill belts, show that animals can independently modify step cycle duration in each pair of limbs. This organization would allow relatively simple descending commands to modify the coupling between each CPG and so to alter the pattern of the gait. CPGs have now been identified and analyzed in many rhythmic motor systems, including those

20/01/21 2:45 PM


Part V / Movement

controlling over-ground locomotion, swimming, fly-

ing, respiration, and swallowing, in both invertebrates

and vertebrates. In all vertebrates except higher pri-

mates and humans, a prominent locomotor pattern can be observed immediately after spinal transection when the spinal cord below the transection is activated with neuroactive drugs that function as a substitute for the descending drive that normally activates the spinal locomotor networks (Box 33–1). The Spinal Circuits Responsible for Locomotion

Can Be Modified by Experience

## Lesion of the spinal cord in otherwise intact adult mammals leads to paralysis. In the absence of any further intervention, such animals will regain only mini-

mal locomotion. However, when quadrupedal animals with complete lesions of the thoracic spinal cord are trained daily, they regain a remarkable ability to use their hindlimbs to walk on a treadmill. A similar improvement in locomotion can also be obtained from the application of noradrenergic agonists. Indeed, recordings of hindlimb joint angles and

EMG activity from these animals show that the spinal cord isolated from all descending systems can generate most of the coordinating features in the hindlimb that are observed in intact animals. This training effect is believed to occur because of an activity-dependent reorganization of both internal spinal circuits and the modification of synaptic inputs from peripheral afferents that is specific to the training regimen. Indeed, cats can be trained specifically to either support their weight or to walk, without a transfer of motor skills between the two behaviors. Spinal Locomotor Networks Are Organized Into

Rhythm- and Pattern-Generation Circuits

## The question of how the spinal cord generates the complex activity underlying locomotion has been one of intense study that has followed three complemen-

tary paths. The earliest experiments directed at this issue were performed in the cat and provided important information on the functional characteristics of different interneuronal populations. However, the complex nature of the mammalian spinal cord led researchers to identify models with fewer neurons in the spinal cord, such as the turtle and two aquatic preparations, the tadpole and the lamprey (Box 33–1). These latter two models have provided an excellent window into the organization of the spinal circuits involved in swimming and a foundation for studying

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 792

rhythm and pattern generation in limbed animals.

Last, the development of important molecular-genetic

models in the mouse and the zebrafish has provided

additional insights not available by more traditional methods. The Swimming Central Pattern Generator

The lamprey—a jawless fish—swims like an eel with a

## wave of left–right bending traveling from front to back (Figure 33–3A). The spinal cord is made up of about

100 spinal segments, each containing neurons that can generate the rhythm and produce alternation between the two sides of the body. The rhythm is generated by interconnected glutamatergic excitatory neurons endowed with active membrane properties supporting rhythm generation. These glutamatergic neurons, which are the kernel in the swimming network, excite commissural inhibitory neurons, local inhibitory neurons, and motor neurons on the same side of the cord (Figure 33–7A). The commissural interneurons, whose axons cross the midline, inhibit the contralateral interneurons involved in generating the alternating rhythm as well

as contralateral motor neurons (Figure 33–7A). Cellular mechanisms contribute to phase switching in the network (Box 33–2). For example, Ca 2+ entry triggered by bursting in glutamatergic neurons activates their calcium-activated K + channels. The opening of these channels hyperpolarizes the cells and enables termination of the burst. The termination of bursting on one side activates the other side by the commissural interneurons, thus allowing the contralateral rhythmgenerating interneurons and motor neurons to become active. To enable coordination along the body, the segmental networks are connected through long-distance descending projections of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. This basic organization of interconnected excitatory neurons, inhibitory commissural neurons, and a rostrocaudal connectivity gradient for intersegmental coordination is also found in the tadpole and is possibly common to other swimming species. Molecular and genetic approaches have expanded our understanding of the functional organization of CPGs in fish and identified two groups of glutamater-

gic interneurons—a group of commissural neurons and a group of ipsilaterally projecting neurons—that are involved in rhythm generation but at different speeds of locomotion. In adult zebrafish, the rhythmgenerating circuit is composed of three functional classes of excitatory neurons that drive slow, intermediate, and fast pools of motor neurons that are selectively recruited as the speed of swimming increases.

20/01/21 2:45 PM

The Quadrupedal Central Pattern Generator

The CPG controlling quadrupedal locomotion has added

## organizational complexity compared to the swimming CPG since it must generate both the rhythm and the pat-

tern that involves the sequential flexor-extensor alternation of muscles around different joints within a limb (Figure 33–4B), as well as left–right coordination and coordination between the forelimbs and hindlimbs. Cir -cuits controlling the forelimb are located in the cervical enlargement, whereas circuits controlling the hindlimb are located in the lower thoracic and lumbar spinal cord. As in the CPG that generates rhythmical swimming activity, glutamatergic excitatory interneurons are involved in quadrupedal rhythm generation. Using

advanced mouse genetics together with a molecular code that builds on expression of gene-regulating transcription factors that differentiate spinal neurons into classes with specific projection and transmitter phenotypes (Box 33–3), it has now been shown that the core of the rhythm-generating circuits in rodents includes two nonoverlapping groups of molecularly distinct glutamatergic neurons (Shox2 ON and Hb9; Figure 33–7B1). The flexor (f) and extensor (e) rhythm-generating (R) circuits, which are connected by reciprocal inhibition (Figure 33–7B), drive other neurons in the locomo-

tor network into rhythmicity and provide the rhythmic excitation for motor neurons (Figure 33–7B). As has been observed in the swimming CPG, ionic channels are also likely to contribute to rhythm generation and phase switching in the quadrupedal CPG. The Flexor and Extensor Coordination Circuit

Flexor and extensor activity must be coordinated

## around joints (eg, hip-knee-ankle-toe in the hindlimb)

to control the limb movement in a precise manner.

Accordingly, the flexor-extensor alternation around the different joints is not simultaneous but has a sequential pattern, which suggests that multiple flexor-extensor alternating circuits are needed to time muscle actions in a limb. The basic flexor-extensor alternation circuits are organized in flexor and extensor modules composed of inhibitory and excitatory interneurons that are one synapse away from the flexor and extensor motor neurons they control (Figure 33–7B,B1). Inhibitory and excitatory neurons in the module provide alternating inhibition and excitation of motor neurons. The reciprocally connected inhibitory

Ia interneurons (Chapter 32) are part of the flexor and extensor modules providing the direct motor neuron inhibition in a reciprocal fashion (rIa in Figure 33–7B1). The rIas belong to the molecularly defined inhibitory

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 793

Chapter 33 / Locomotion


V1 and V2b neurons (Figure 33–7B1). The excitatory

neurons that directly excite motor neurons during

locomotion are likely to belong to multiple classes of

ON

neurons in the spinal cord, including V2a-Shox2 and the dI3 neurons (Figure 33–7B1). In this basic scheme, the flexor-extensor modules are driven by flexor (fR in Figure 33–7B1) and extensor rhythm-generating circuits (eR in Figure 33–7B1),

which themselves are reciprocally connected via inhibitory neurons (Figure 33–7B), resulting in their out-ofphase activity. Left–Right Coordination

Left–right alternation, for both swimming and over-

ground locomotion, depends on crossed inhibition

produced in two ways: directly by inhibitory commis-

sural neurons or indirectly by excitatory commissural neurons, each of which acts on premotor inhibitory neurons (Figure 33–7B2). This dual inhibitory system has a counterpart in one specific neuronal population, the V0 commissural neurons (Figure 33–7B2). Ablation of V0 neurons results in loss of left–right alternation at all speeds of locomotion. The inhibitory dorsal class of V0 neurons (V0 D ), which makes up about half of the V0 population, controls alternating locomotion during walking, whereas the excitatory ventral class of V0 neurons (V0 V ), which makes up the remaining half of V0 neurons, controls alternating locomotion during trot. The dual system thus serves a speed-dependent role in coordinating alternating gaits (walk and trot). Separate excitatory non-V0 commissural neurons—possibly the ventral V3 neurons (Box 33–3)—are responsible for synchrony in gaits such as bound and gallop (Figure 33–7B2). The dual-mode left–right alternating pathways are driven directly by the rhythm-generating neurons or indirectly by other non–rhythm-generating excita-

tory neurons, including the V2a-Shox2 Off f neurons that are recruited at high speeds of locomotion and synaptically connect to the V0 V neurons. The left–right synchronous pathways are active at higher speeds of locomotion when the alternating system is suppressed or less active. The speed-dependent changes in the left–right alternation circuits in the rodent are an example of functional reorganization of the vertebrate locomotor

network needed to produce diverse motor outputs. Similar dynamic circuit reorganization has also been demonstrated in zebrafish and in studies of rhythmic networks in invertebrates, such as the stomatogastric ganglion controlling gut movements in crustaceans, where different functional networks emerge from a common CPG network.

20/01/21 2:45 PM
The Quadrupedal Central Pattern Generator

The CPG controlling quadrupedal locomotion has added

## organizational complexity compared to the swimming CPG since it must generate both the rhythm and the pat-

tern that involves the sequential flexor-extensor alternation of muscles around different joints within a limb (Figure 33–4B), as well as left–right coordination and coordination between the forelimbs and hindlimbs. Cir -cuits controlling the forelimb are located in the cervical enlargement, whereas circuits controlling the hindlimb are located in the lower thoracic and lumbar spinal cord. As in the CPG that generates rhythmical swimming activity, glutamatergic excitatory interneurons are involved in quadrupedal rhythm generation. Using

advanced mouse genetics together with a molecular code that builds on expression of gene-regulating transcription factors that differentiate spinal neurons into classes with specific projection and transmitter phenotypes (Box 33–3), it has now been shown that the core of the rhythm-generating circuits in rodents includes two nonoverlapping groups of molecularly distinct glutamatergic neurons (Shox2 ON and Hb9; Figure 33–7B1). The flexor (f) and extensor (e) rhythm-generating (R) circuits, which are connected by reciprocal inhibition (Figure 33–7B), drive other neurons in the locomo-

tor network into rhythmicity and provide the rhythmic excitation for motor neurons (Figure 33–7B). As has been observed in the swimming CPG, ionic channels are also likely to contribute to rhythm generation and phase switching in the quadrupedal CPG. The Flexor and Extensor Coordination Circuit

Flexor and extensor activity must be coordinated

## around joints (eg, hip-knee-ankle-toe in the hindlimb)

to control the limb movement in a precise manner.

Accordingly, the flexor-extensor alternation around the different joints is not simultaneous but has a sequential pattern, which suggests that multiple flexor-extensor alternating circuits are needed to time muscle actions in a limb. The basic flexor-extensor alternation circuits are organized in flexor and extensor modules composed of inhibitory and excitatory interneurons that are one synapse away from the flexor and extensor motor neurons they control (Figure 33–7B,B1). Inhibitory and excitatory neurons in the module provide alternating inhibition and excitation of motor neurons. The reciprocally connected inhibitory

Ia interneurons (Chapter 32) are part of the flexor and extensor modules providing the direct motor neuron inhibition in a reciprocal fashion (rIa in Figure 33–7B1). The rIas belong to the molecularly defined inhibitory

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 793

Chapter 33 / Locomotion


V1 and V2b neurons (Figure 33–7B1). The excitatory

neurons that directly excite motor neurons during

locomotion are likely to belong to multiple classes of

ON

neurons in the spinal cord, including V2a-Shox2 and the dI3 neurons (Figure 33–7B1). In this basic scheme, the flexor-extensor modules are driven by flexor (fR in Figure 33–7B1) and extensor rhythm-generating circuits (eR in Figure 33–7B1),

which themselves are reciprocally connected via inhibitory neurons (Figure 33–7B), resulting in their out-ofphase activity. Left–Right Coordination

Left–right alternation, for both swimming and over-

ground locomotion, depends on crossed inhibition

produced in two ways: directly by inhibitory commis-

sural neurons or indirectly by excitatory commissural neurons, each of which acts on premotor inhibitory neurons (Figure 33–7B2). This dual inhibitory system has a counterpart in one specific neuronal population, the V0 commissural neurons (Figure 33–7B2). Ablation of V0 neurons results in loss of left–right alternation at all speeds of locomotion. The inhibitory dorsal class of V0 neurons (V0 D ), which makes up about half of the V0 population, controls alternating locomotion during walking, whereas the excitatory ventral class of V0 neurons (V0 V ), which makes up the remaining half of V0 neurons, controls alternating locomotion during trot. The dual system thus serves a speed-dependent role in coordinating alternating gaits (walk and trot). Separate excitatory non-V0 commissural neurons—possibly the ventral V3 neurons (Box 33–3)—are responsible for synchrony in gaits such as bound and gallop (Figure 33–7B2). The dual-mode left–right alternating pathways are driven directly by the rhythm-generating neurons or indirectly by other non–rhythm-generating excita-

tory neurons, including the V2a-Shox2 Off f neurons that are recruited at high speeds of locomotion and synaptically connect to the V0 V neurons. The left–right synchronous pathways are active at higher speeds of locomotion when the alternating system is suppressed or less active. The speed-dependent changes in the left–right alternation circuits in the rodent are an example of functional reorganization of the vertebrate locomotor

network needed to produce diverse motor outputs. Similar dynamic circuit reorganization has also been demonstrated in zebrafish and in studies of rhythmic networks in invertebrates, such as the stomatogastric ganglion controlling gut movements in crustaceans, where different functional networks emerge from a common CPG network.

20/01/21 2:45 PM


Part V / Movement

A Swimming CPG: Rhythm and left–right coordination circuits Midline

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 794

Right-

side

muscles

20/01/21 2:45 PM

Interlimb Coordination

The organization of the networks that couple fore- and

hindlimbs is not known in detail, but experiments

using both lesion and genetic ablation suggest that

these pathways involve both inhibitory and excitatory intersegmental connections. Somatosensory Inputs From Moving Limbs

Modulate Locomotion

## Even though the CPG can produce the precise timing and phasing of the muscle activity needed to walk, this

central pattern is normally modulated by sensory sig-

nals from the moving limbs. Two types of sensory input modulate the CPG activity: proprioceptive information generated by the active movement of the limb and tactile information generated when the moving limb meets an obstacle in the surrounding environment. Proprioception Regulates the Timing and Amplitude of Stepping

## One of the clearest indications that somatosensory signals from moving limbs regulate the locomotor cycle

is that the rate of locomotion in spinal and decerebrate

cats matches the speed of the motorized treadmill belt on which they walk. As the stepping rate increases, the

Figure 33–7 (Opposite) Spinal locomotor networks are

organized into rhythm- and pattern-generation circuits with

distinct cellular identities.

A. Circuit diagram of swimming central pattern generator (CPG) in the lamprey. Rhythm-generating circuits include excitatory interneurons (EN) that drive motor neurons (MN), inhibitory

commissural interneurons (CIN) whose axons project to the other half of the cord, and local inhibitory interneurons (IN) with axons projecting on the same side of the cord. A single neuron in the diagram represents multiple neurons in the animal. Gray neurons, inhibitory; red neurons, excitatory. The vertical dashed line indicates the midline. (Data from Grillner 2006.) B. General circuit diagram for limbed locomotion. Rhythmgenerating circuits (fR and eR) composed of excitatory neurons on either side of the spinal cord drive flexor and extensor muscles on the same side through a pattern-generating layer (empty box). Rhythm-generating flexor (fR) and extensor (eR) neurons are reciprocally connected via inhibitory neurons and are connected across the midline via commissural interneurons (not shown) that mediate left–right coordination. The diagram shows one spinal segment. (Abbreviation: MN, motor neurons.) (Data from Kiehn 2016.) B1. Flexor and extensor alternation is controlled at multiple levels in the locomotor network. One synapse away from flexor (f)

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 795

Chapter 33 / Locomotion


stance phase becomes shorter while the swing phase

remains relatively constant.

This observation suggests that some form of sen-

sory input from the moving limb signals the end of the stance phase and thus leads to the initiation of the

swing phase. The sensory information from the moving limb is generated by proprioceptors in the muscles and joints. These proprioceptors include stretch-sensitive muscle spindles in the hip and force-sensitive Golgi tendon organs in the ankle that are particularly important for facilitating locomotor phase transition. The influence from the hip was noticed already by Sherrington, who showed that rapid extension at the hip joint leads to contractions in the hip flexor mus-

cles of chronic spinal cats and dogs. More recent studies have found that preventing hip extension in a limb suppresses stepping in that limb, whereas rhythmically moving the hip in an immobilized cat can entrain the locomotor rhythm; that is, the stretching of the hip muscles causes the timing of the motor output to match the rhythm of the externally imposed movements (Figure 33–8A). The stretching also activates flexor muscle spindles and mimics the lengthening that occurs at the end of the stance phase, thus inhibiting extensor activity and facilitating activation of the flexor rhythmgenerating circuits in the spinal cord (Figure 33–8B). Activation of sensory fibers from Golgi tendon organs and muscle spindles in ankle extensor muscles prolongs the stance phase, often delaying the onset of

and extensor (e) motor neurons (MN) are Ia-inhibitory interneu-

rons, which reciprocally innervate antagonist motor neurons

and each other (Chapter 32). The rIa neurons belong to two

major groups of molecularly defined inhibitory neurons, V1 and V2b, in the ventral spinal cord. Excitatory neurons with different molecular markers (including V2a-Shox2 ON ) provide premotor rhythmic excitation of motor neurons. Rhythm-generating Shox2 ON or Hb9 neurons (fR and eR) drive both inhibitory and excitatory premotor neurons. (Data from Kiehn 2016.) B2. Rhythm-generating circuits drive left–right coordinating circuits composed of a dual inhibitory pathway involved in alternation and a single excitatory pathway involved in syn-

chrony. The dual inhibitory pathway is composed of inhibitory V0 D commissural neurons that directly inhibit rhythm generation on the other side and excitatory V0 V commissural neu -rons that indirectly inhibit locomotor networks on the other side. The inhibitory V0 D commissural neuron pathway controls the alternating gait walk. A population of V2a excitatory neurons is part of the left–right alternating circuit and connects to V0 V commissural neurons. This pathway controls the alternating gait trot. Rhythm-generation circuits also drive a left–right synchronizing circuit possibly involved in bound, composed of non-V0 neurons. Only the projections from the left to the right side are shown. (Data from Kiehn 2016.)

20/01/21 2:45 PM


Part V / Movement

Box 33–2 Neuronal Ion Channels Contribute to Central Pattern Generator Function

## Neuronal membrane properties make an important conthe subthreshold spike range may enhance or delay

tribution to the function of the central pattern genera-

tor (CPG). Neurons have a variety of K

+

, Na

+

, and Ca

2+

channels that determine their activity and response to synaptic inputs. Studies of CPGs in diverse experimental models have shown that ion channels may be important for promoting rhythmicity, through bursting properties, or patterning, through ion channels that affect phase transitions or the rate of neuronal discharge. Bursting and Plateau Properties Amplify Cellular Responses

## Membrane properties that produce bursting allow cells to produce sustained oscillations in the absence of synaptic inputs. These properties are either intrinsic, as in

cells in the sinusoidal node in the heart, or conditional, dependent on the presence of certain neurotransmitters. In some small motor CPGs (such as the pyloric network in the stomatogastric ganglion, which controls rhythmic movements in the gut of crustaceans), intrinsic bursting properties are essential for generating the rhythm. Conditional bursting triggered by glutaminergic activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors has been described in spinal cord interneurons and

motor neurons in lamprey, rodents, and amphibians. In the lamprey, bursting due to NMDA receptor activation plays a role in generating swimming. In mammals, it is as yet uncertain whether NMDA receptor–induced bursting is essential for rhythm generation, although it may facilitate excitatory synaptic inputs in the circuit. Plateau potential is another membrane property that may cause a neuron's membrane potential to jump to a depolarized state that will support action potential firing phase transitions by such inhibition. Three types of voltage-gated channels are involved: a transient low

2+

threshold Ca channel, cation-nonselective permeable hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, and transient K + channels. The transient low-threshold Ca 2+ channels are inac -tivated at membrane potentials around rest. Transient inhibitory synaptic inputs remove the inactivation.

When released from synaptic inhibition, activation of low-threshold Ca 2+ channels will cause a short-lasting rebound excitation before the channels inactivate again. In the lamprey, spinal cord activation of metabotropic GABA B receptors depresses low-threshold Ca 2+ channels involved in producing the swimming motor pattern. The suppression leads to a longer hyperpolarized phase and therefore to a slower alternation between antagonistic muscles, a possible mechanism for the slowing of swimming seen following GABA B receptor activation. HCN channels are found in many CPG neurons and motor neurons and may help neurons escape from inhibition. They are activated by hyperpolarization, such

as occurs during synaptic inhibition. Their activation depolarizes the cell, counteracting the hyperpolarization. Finally, the kinetics of their activation and deactivation are slow, so they stay open for some time after the hyperpolarization is released. The channel kinetics affect the integrative properties of the cell in two important ways. First, the depolarization caused by the channel opening limits the effect of sustained inhibitory inputs and helps the cell escape from inhibition. Second, the slow closing following synaptic inhibition leads to a rebound excitation promoting the next burst. Voltage-gated A-type transient K + channels are usually inactivated at resting membrane potential. Hyperpolarization removes the resting inactivation, and

channels or -subsequent depolarization will cause a transient activation of the channel. Their activation will therefore delay the onset of the next burst. Regulation of Spiking Controls How Much Cells Are Activated

+

without further increase in the excitatory drive. Plateau properties amplify and prolong the effect of synaptic excitatory inputs and may promote rhythm generation and motor output. Plateau properties are generated by activation of slowly inactivating L-type Ca 2+ slowly inactivating Na + channels. These channels have been found in vertebrate interneurons and motor neu rons. The expression of plateau properties mediated by L-type Ca 2+ channels in motor neurons is controlled by neuromodulatory neurotransmitters, such as serotonin and norepinephrine. The slowly inactivating Na nels are generally not regulated by neurotransmitters. Blockage of these channels decreases rhythm generation. Phase Transitions May Be Regulated by Voltage-Gated Ion Channel Activation

## chan -A number of different ion channels play a role in regulating the firing rate of a cell. Activation and inactivation kinetics of Na + channels are factors. Other important

## Reciprocal inhibition between neurons is a common design in locomotor circuits; ion channels activated in

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 796

channels are sodium- and calcium-activated K + chan -nels. The effect of activation of these K + channels is often seen as a slow after-hyperpolarization following an action potential or a train of action potentials. Activation of these channels therefore causes spike train adaptation and postactivation inhibition, which contribute to burst termination.

20/01/21 2:45 PM

Chapter 33 / Locomotion

Box 33–3 Molecular-Genetics Combined With Anatomical, Electrophysiological, and Behavioral

Analyses Are Used to Unravel the Locomotor Network Organization

## To unravel the functional organization of the large neuronal networks in the spinal cord, researchers have of transcription factors defines these subtypes (Table 33–1). Each group of interneurons has specific transmit-

used molecular-genetic–driven network analysis to take

advantage of a molecular code that determines the spatial layout of the spinal locomotor networks. It has been well documented that motor neurons develop and differentiate according to a genetic code expressed in the embryonic spinal cord (Chapter 45).

This feature extends also to the development of spinal interneurons, which can be identified by different transcription factors (Table 33–1). The cardinal classes of interneuronal types belong to dorsally located interneurons (dI1–dI6) and ventrally located interneurons (V0–V3), with further subdivision within these categories (eg, V0 and V0 V, V, V2a-Shox2 Off , V2a-Shox On ) where a combination ter content and characteristic axonal projection patterns.

The ability to manipulate these specific interneuron types gives an unparalleled opportunity to examine the functional contribution of specific subsets of

D interneurons in the mouse or zebrafish that is not possible in species such as the cat. The molecular code of the spinal cord neurons is used to mark cells with a marker protein such as green fluorescent protein or for the expression of proteins that allow for cell type-specific ablation or activation/inactivation of cells types. Such studies have ascribed specific locomotor functions to the dI3, V0–V3, and Hb9 cells, all molecularly differentiated classes of neurons (Table 33–1). Table 33–1 Developmental Molecular Codes Specify the Identity of Spinal Neurons in

the Spinal Cord

Postmitotic transcription factors Neuron type Transmitters

| Islt1/Tlx3  dI3  Glutamate  Pax2/7  V0  D  GABA/glycine  Evx1  V0  V  Glutamate  Evx1/Pitx2  V0  C  Acetylcholine  Evx1/Pitx2  V0  D  Glutamate  En1  V1  GABA/glycine  Chx10  V2a-Shox2  Off  Glutamate  Chx10/Shox2  V2a-Shox2  ON  Glutamate  GATA2/3  V2b  GABA/glycine  Sox1  V2c  GABA/glycine  Shox2  V2d  Glutamate  Hb9/Islt1-2  MN  Acetylcholine  Hb9  Hb9  Glutamate  Sim1  V3  D  Glutamate  Sim1  V3  V  Glutamate  Chx10, Ceh-10 homeodomain-containing homolog; Evx1, even skipped homeobox 1; En1,  engrailed 1; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GATA2/3, gata protein; Hb9, homeobox 9; Islt1-2, ISL1-2  transcription factor; Pax, paired box gene; Pitx2, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2;   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 797

Sim1, single-minded homolog 1; MN, motor neuron; Shox2, Short stature homeobox 2; Sox1, SRY box-containing gene 1; Tlx1/3, T cell leukemia, homeobox 1/3. Source: Adapted from Jessell 2000, Goulding 2009, Dougherty et al. 2013.


20/01/21 2:45 PM


Part V / Movement Stretch exor the swing phase until the stimulus has ended (Figure

<!-- image -->

33–9A). Sensory fibers from both types of receptors are

active during stance, with the intensity of the signal

from the Golgi tendon organs being strongly related to the load carried by the leg. Golgi tendon organs have inhibitory actions on ankle extensor motor neurons when the body is at rest (Chapter 32) but an excitatory action during walking. This reversal of the sign of the reflex is caused by inhibition of inhibitory interneuron pathways together with a release of excitatory pathways during locomotion. The functional consequence of this reflex reversal during locomotion is that the swing phase is not initiated until the extensor muscles are unloaded and the forces exerted by these muscles are low, as signaled by a decrease in activity from the Golgi tendon organs near the end of stance. In sum, proprioceptive signals from the ankle extensor muscles and hip flexor muscles work synergistically to facilitate the stance-to-swing phase transi-

tion. In the late stance phase, when the limb is unloaded, as inhibitory signals from Golgi tendon organs wane, their effects on extensor rhythm generation declines, while at the same time the activity in muscle afferents around the hip joint is increased, facilitating activity in flexor rhythm generation. At least three excitatory pathways transmit sensory information from extensor muscles to extensor motor neurons during walking: a monosynaptic pathway from

primary muscle spindles (group Ia afferents), a disynaptic pathway from primary muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs (group Ia and Ib afferents), and a polysynaptic pathway from primary muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs that includes interneurons in the extensor rhythm generator (Figure 33–9B). These pathways all contribute to phase transition from stance to swing when the ankle is unloaded and maintain extensors in stance phase when the ankle is loaded. In addition to regulating the transition from stance to swing, proprioceptive information from muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs contributes signifi500 ms

A. In an immobilized decerebrate cat, passive oscillating move-

ment around the hip joint initiates and entrains the fictive locomotor pattern in knee extensor and flexor motor neurons. The

flexor electromyogram (EMG) bursts correspond to the swing phase and are generated when the hip is extended. (Adapted, with permission, from Kriellaars et al. 1994.) B. In a walking decerebrate cat, stretching of the hip flexor muscle (iliopsoas) inhibits knee extensor EMG activity, allowing knee flexor activity to begin earlier. The arrow in the knee

flexor record indicates when activity in the muscle would have begun had the hip flexor muscle not been stretched. Activation of sensory fibers from muscle spindles in the hip flexor muscle is responsible for this effect. (Adapted, with permission, from Hiebert et al. 1996.)

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 798

cantly to the generation of burst activity in extensor motor neurons. Reducing this sensory input in cats diminishes the level of extensor activity by more than half; in humans, it has been estimated that up to 30% of the activity of ankle extensor motor neurons is caused by feedback from the extensor muscles. Mechanoreceptors in the Skin Allow Stepping to

Adjust to Unexpected Obstacles

## Mechanoreceptors in the skin, including some nociceptors, have a powerful influence on the CPG for

20/01/21 2:45 PM

A

Contralateral

exor Chapter 33 / Locomotion

– –

<!-- image -->

A. In a decerebrate cat, electrical stimulation of group I sensory

fibers from ankle extensor muscles inhibits the electromyogram burst in ipsilateral flexors and prolongs the burst in the

ipsilateral extensors during walking. The timing of contralateral flexor activity is not altered. Stimulating group I fibers from ankle extensors prevents initiation of the swing phase, as can be seen in the position of the leg during the time the fibers were stimulated. The arrow shows the point at which the swing phase would normally have occurred had the ankle extensor afferents not been stimulated. (Adapted, with permission, from Whelan, Hiebert, and Pearson 1995. Copyright © Springer-Verlag 1995.) walking. One important function of these receptors is

to detect obstacles and adjust stepping movements to

avoid them. A well-studied example is the corrective

reaction to stumbling in cats. A mild mechanical stimulus applied to the dorsal part of the paw during the swing phase produces excitation of flexor motor neurons and inhibition of

extensor motor neurons, leading to rapid flexion of the paw away from the stimulus and elevation of the leg in an attempt to step over the object. Because this corrective response is readily observed in spinal cats, it must be produced to a large extent by circuits entirely contained within the spinal cord. One of the interesting features of the corrective reaction is that corrective flexion movements are produced only if the paw is stimulated during the swing phase.

An identical stimulus applied during the stance phase

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 799

Flex

Int

+

Flex

MN

Swing

afferent pathway regulating the stance phase. Feedback

from extensor muscles increases the level of activity in extensor motor neurons (MN) during the stance phase and maintains extensor activity when the extensor muscles are loaded. The feedback is relayed through three excitatory (+) pathways: (1) monosynaptic connections from Ia fibers to extensor motor neurons; (2) disynaptic connections from Ia and Ib fibers to extensor motor neurons; and (3) polysynaptic excitatory pathways that act through the extensor rhythm generator to maintain the extensor motor neurons active in stance phase.

produces the opposite response—excitation of extensor

muscles that reinforces the ongoing extensor activity.

This extensor action is appropriate; if a flexion reflex

were produced during the stance phase, the animal might collapse because it is being supported by the limb. This is an example of a phase-dependent reflex reversal. The same stimulus can excite one group of motor neurons during one phase of locomotion while activating the antagonist motor neurons during another phase. Supraspinal Structures Are Responsible for

Initiation and Adaptive Control of Stepping

## Although the basic motor patterns for locomotion are generated in the spinal cord, the initiation, selec-

tion, and planning of locomotion require activation

20/01/21 2:45 PM

B

Ext



Part V / Movement

of supraspinal structures, including the brain stem,

the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex.

Supraspinal regulation of stepping provides a number

of behavioral modifications that cannot be mediated by spinal circuits alone. These include the voluntary initiation of locomotion and the regulation of speed; postural regulation, including weight support, balance, and interlimb coordination; and the planning and execution of anticipatory modifications of gait, particularly visually guided modifications. Midbrain Nuclei Initiate and Maintain Locomotion and Control Speed

## The locomotor networks in the spinal cord require a command or start signal from supraspinal regions to

initiate and maintain their activity. The major neu-

ronal structure involved in the initiation in vertebrates is a region in the midbrain called the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR). The MLR was first identified in cats as a unitary region localized in or around the cuneiform nucleus, just below the inferior colliculus. Tonic electrical stimulation in this area in the resting animal increased postural tonus so that the animal stood up and then started to walk. As the intensity of stimulation rose, the speed of locomotion increased and alternating gaits switched to synchronous gaits such as gallop or bound (Figure 33–10). Later studies with electrical stimulation confirmed the presence of the MLR in all vertebrates, suggesting that the MLR is evolutionarily conserved from the old-

est vertebrates to humans. These studies have pointed to two midbrain structures as part of the MLR (Figure 33–11A): the cuneiform nucleus (CNF) and the more ventrally located pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) (Figure 33–11A). These two nuclei differ in the types of neurons they contain. Long-range projection neurons in the CNF are excitatory and use glutamate as their neurotransmitter, whereas those in the PPN are both glutamatergic

and cholinergic. In both nuclei, the excitatory neurons are intermingled with local GABAergic interneurons. Electrical stimulation has, however, been unable to determine which nucleus or which types of neurons are involved in the initiation of locomotion and speed control. However, the use of selective activation and inactivation of neurotransmitter-specific CNF and PPN neurons suggests that the two nuclei play specific roles in speed control and gait selection of locomotion (Figure 33–11B). Glutamatergic neurons in both PPN and CNF are sufficient for supporting alternating locomotion at slower speeds, such as walking and trot, while glutamatergic neurons in the CNF are necessary

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 800

for high-speed locomotion, such as gallop and bound,

characteristic of escape locomotion. Expression of

these gaits is dependent on the stimulation frequency,

possibly reflecting the effect of firing frequency in the intact animal. The role of cholinergic PPN neurons for locomotion is less well understood. In mammals, they do not seem to have a strong role in maintaining locomotion.

These roles of glutamatergic CNF and PPN neurons in locomotor control may also be reflected in the different inputs. PPN neurons receive strong input

from the basal ganglia, specifically the substantia nigra pars reticulata, globus pallidus pars interna, and subthalamic nucleus, as well as from sensorimotor and frontal cortex. Additionally, the PPN receives sensorimotor information from many nuclei in the midbrain and brain stem. The nucleus may therefore serve as a hub for integrating information from many brain structures, possibly leading to the release of slower exploratory locomotion. In contrast, the input to neurons in CNF is much more restricted and arises principally from structures that may be involved in escape responses. The MLR is therefore composed of two regions that act together to select context-dependent locomotor behavior. Another brain area that evokes locomotion when stimulated is the subthalamic (or diencephalic) locomotor region (to be distinguished from the subthalamic

nucleus). This region includes nuclei in the dorsal and lateral hypothalamus involved in various homeostatic features such as regulating feeding. Neurons in these areas project to neurons in the reticular formation and bypass the PPN and CNF, suggesting a parallel pathway for initiating locomotion, possibly driven by the need to find food. Midbrain Nuclei That Initiate Locomotion Project to Brain Stem Neurons

## The excitatory signals from CNF and PPN are relayed indirectly to the spinal cord by way of neurons in the

brain stem reticular formation, which provide the final

command signal to the locomotor networks in the spinal cord. The identity of these neurons is only partly known. In general terms, two transmitter-defined pathways are involved: glutamatergic and serotonergic. The glutamatergic locomotor pathways probably have multiple origins in the brain stem reticular formation, forming parallel descending pathways. They

project directly or indirectly via a chain of intersegmental (propriospinal) glutamatergic interneurons to locomotor neurons in the spinal cord (Figure 33–10A). Reticulospinal neurons also participate in regulating

20/01/21 2:45 PM

locomotion.

A. Electrical stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region Chapter 33 / Locomotion Mesencephalic locomotor region Ventrolateral funiculus Gallop

0.5 s

B.  When the strength of electrical stimulation of the MLR in a

decerebrate cat walking on a treadmill is gradually increased,

the gait and rate of stepping change from slow walking to trot-

MLR

(MLR) in the cat initiates locomotion by activating neurons in the medial reticular formation whose axons descend in the ven trolateral funiculus (VLF) to the spinal locomotor system.

<!-- image -->

-ting and finally to galloping. As the cat progresses from trotting to galloping, the hind limbs shift from alternating to in-phase activity. (Adapted from Shik et al. 1966.)

the postural activity that is needed for the animal to

locomote (see later discussion).

Evidence for the existence of a serotonergic loco-

motor pathway in mammals is restricted to experiments in rats that have shown the involvement of

serotonergic neurons in the caudal brain stem. The mechanisms by which the final command signals from the brain stem to the spinal cord activate the spinal locomotor networks, maintain their activity, and allow the expression of different gaits are unknown. The episodic nature of locomotion indicates that the initiating signals may be complemented by stop

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 801

commands to allow for sudden locomotor arrest.

Such signals have been found in Xenopus tadpole, in

which head contact with obstacles activates GABAer

-

gic descending pathways that immediately terminate swimming. Likewise, in decerebrate cats, tonic electrical stimulation of the medullary and caudal pontine reticular formation leads to a general motor inhibition. Studies in mice have identified a restricted contingent of V2a neurons in the reticular formation that medi -ate an immediate arrest of ongoing locomotor activity. Such "V2a stop neurons" send a behaviorally relevant stop signal via descending projections to inhibitory

20/01/21 2:45 PM

A

Rostral



Part V / Movement


initiation of locomotion, speed and gait regulation, and LHL

LFL

RHL

RFL

context-dependent selection of locomotion. A. Left: The site of the localization of mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) in the midbrain of the mouse. Right: Transverse section shows that the MLR is composed of the cuneiform

<!-- image -->

nucleus (CNF) and the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) in the midbrain, lateral to the cerebral aqueduct, and dorsal to the nucleus reticularis pontis oralis (NRPo). Glutamatergic, GABAergic, and cholinergic neurons are intermingled in the CNF and PPN. (Abbreviation: IC, inferior colliculus). B. Effect in mice of optical stimulation of glutamatergic cells in the CNF or PPN that have been transfected with the light-sensitive channel, channelrhodopsin 2. Stimulation at

low and high frequencies in the PPN leads only to alternating

interneurons in the ventral lumbar spinal cord that

inhibits rhythm generation. A similar stop signal arrests

swimming in the lamprey.

The Brain Stem Nuclei Regulate Posture During Locomotion

## An important aspect of locomotor control is the regulation of posture. This general term encompasses several

types of behavior, including the production of the

postural support on which locomotion is superimposed, the control of balance, the regulation of interlimb coordination in quadrupeds, and the modification of muscle tonus required to adapt to locomotion on slopes or during turning. In addition, anticipatory changes in posture precede changes in voluntary gait modifications, and compensatory changes in posture follow unexpected perturbations. These functions are largely subserved by two descending systems originating from the brain stem: the vestibulospinal tract (VST), originating in the lateral vestibular nucleus (LVN), and the reticulospinal

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 802

High

Speed

Low

high-frequency stimulation evokes the synchronous gaits gallop

and bound corresponding to escape locomotion. The different types of gaits are shown as idealized diagrams from low to high speeds of locomotion. Filled boxes represent the stance phase; open spaces the swing phase. Walk is characterized by periods of support by three or four feet simul-

taneously. Trot is characterized by simultaneous activity in the diagonal fore and hindlimbs. Gallop is characterized by the forelimbs moving slightly out of phase and hind limbs being almost in phase. Bound is characterized by hind limbs and forelimbs moving simultaneously and forelimb and hindlimb out of phase. (Abbreviations: LFL, left forelimb; LHL, left hindlimb; RFL, right forelimb; RHL, right hindlimb.) (Adapted from data in Caggiano et al. 2018.)

tract (RST), originating in the pontomedullary reticular

formation (PMRF). Both pathways are phylogenetically

old and found in all vertebrates.

Lesions of the LVN, the PMRF, or their descending axons in the spinal cord lead to a loss of weight support and the control of equilibrium, expressed as

a crouched gait and swaying of the hindquarters to one side or the other. Lesions of these nuclei are also followed by large changes in the interlimb coordination between the fore- and hindlimbs. Likewise, tonic electrical or chemical stimulation of the pons and the medulla modulates the level of muscle tonus in the limbs and can either facilitate or suppress locomotion depending on the exact site stimulated (Figure 33–12). Activity in the VST and RST, together with activity in the rubrospinal tract, which originates from the red nucleus, also phasically modifies the level of muscle

tonus during each step. Weak electrical stimulation of any of these three structures produces phase-dependent modulation of locomotor activity. Brief activation of these pathways with short trains of stimuli produces

20/01/21 2:46 PM

Bound
Part V / Movement


initiation of locomotion, speed and gait regulation, and LHL

LFL

RHL

RFL

context-dependent selection of locomotion. A. Left: The site of the localization of mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) in the midbrain of the mouse. Right: Transverse section shows that the MLR is composed of the cuneiform

<!-- image -->

nucleus (CNF) and the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) in the midbrain, lateral to the cerebral aqueduct, and dorsal to the nucleus reticularis pontis oralis (NRPo). Glutamatergic, GABAergic, and cholinergic neurons are intermingled in the CNF and PPN. (Abbreviation: IC, inferior colliculus). B. Effect in mice of optical stimulation of glutamatergic cells in the CNF or PPN that have been transfected with the light-sensitive channel, channelrhodopsin 2. Stimulation at

low and high frequencies in the PPN leads only to alternating

interneurons in the ventral lumbar spinal cord that

inhibits rhythm generation. A similar stop signal arrests

swimming in the lamprey.

The Brain Stem Nuclei Regulate Posture During Locomotion

## An important aspect of locomotor control is the regulation of posture. This general term encompasses several

types of behavior, including the production of the

postural support on which locomotion is superimposed, the control of balance, the regulation of interlimb coordination in quadrupeds, and the modification of muscle tonus required to adapt to locomotion on slopes or during turning. In addition, anticipatory changes in posture precede changes in voluntary gait modifications, and compensatory changes in posture follow unexpected perturbations. These functions are largely subserved by two descending systems originating from the brain stem: the vestibulospinal tract (VST), originating in the lateral vestibular nucleus (LVN), and the reticulospinal

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 802

High

Speed

Low

high-frequency stimulation evokes the synchronous gaits gallop

and bound corresponding to escape locomotion. The different types of gaits are shown as idealized diagrams from low to high speeds of locomotion. Filled boxes represent the stance phase; open spaces the swing phase. Walk is characterized by periods of support by three or four feet simul-

taneously. Trot is characterized by simultaneous activity in the diagonal fore and hindlimbs. Gallop is characterized by the forelimbs moving slightly out of phase and hind limbs being almost in phase. Bound is characterized by hind limbs and forelimbs moving simultaneously and forelimb and hindlimb out of phase. (Abbreviations: LFL, left forelimb; LHL, left hindlimb; RFL, right forelimb; RHL, right hindlimb.) (Adapted from data in Caggiano et al. 2018.)

tract (RST), originating in the pontomedullary reticular

formation (PMRF). Both pathways are phylogenetically

old and found in all vertebrates.

Lesions of the LVN, the PMRF, or their descending axons in the spinal cord lead to a loss of weight support and the control of equilibrium, expressed as

a crouched gait and swaying of the hindquarters to one side or the other. Lesions of these nuclei are also followed by large changes in the interlimb coordination between the fore- and hindlimbs. Likewise, tonic electrical or chemical stimulation of the pons and the medulla modulates the level of muscle tonus in the limbs and can either facilitate or suppress locomotion depending on the exact site stimulated (Figure 33–12). Activity in the VST and RST, together with activity in the rubrospinal tract, which originates from the red nucleus, also phasically modifies the level of muscle

tonus during each step. Weak electrical stimulation of any of these three structures produces phase-dependent modulation of locomotor activity. Brief activation of these pathways with short trains of stimuli produces

20/01/21 2:46 PM

Bound A Stimulation sites B Muscle activation et al. 2016.)

<!-- image -->

Chapter 33 / Locomotion

1 Stim MLR

lSol

<!-- image -->


1. Stimulation of the MLR (CNF/PPN) (green bar) produces

rhythmic activation in the left and right hindlimb extensor soleus

muscles (Sol).

A. Transverse sections of the brain stem of the cat at three different rostrocaudal levels. Colored areas indicate the regions stimulated during the trials shown in part B .

(Abbreviations: CNF, cuneiform nucleus; IC, inferior colliculus; MLR, mesencephalic locomotor region; NRPo, nucleus reticularis pontis oralis; NRGc, nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis; NRMc, nucleus reticularis magnocellularis; PPN, pedunculopontine nucleus.) B. Effects of stimulating the different regions of the brain stem indicated in part A in the decerebrate cat.

transient changes in the amplitude of the muscle bursts

but rarely produces any changes in the timing of the

step cycle. Activation of the LVN primarily enhances

responses in ipsilateral extensor muscles during their natural period of activity in the stance phase. In contrast, stimulation of the red nucleus generally produces transient increases in activity in contralateral flexor muscles, again during their natural period of activity in the swing phase. Stimulation of the PMRF produces more complex and widespread responses that may modify activity in flexor muscles during the swing phase and in extensor

muscles during the stance phase across all four limbs in a coordinated pattern (Figure 33–13). In flexor muscles, activity is generally facilitated by PMRF stimulation, but in extensor muscles, it may be facilitated or suppressed depending on the exact site stimulated. This phase-dependent nature of the responses is thought to

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 803

2.  Tonic stimulation of the NRGc (red bar) in the medulla results in a loss of muscle tone in the extensor muscles. 3. Stimulation of the NRGc during CNF-induced
2. locomotion reduces muscle tone and thereby inhibits locomotion.
4.  Tonic stimulation of the NRMc (blue bar) in the ventral medulla produces an increase in muscle tone. 5. Stimulation of the NRMc during MLR stimulation results in
4. increased vigor of locomotion.

be mediated by activation of interneurons in the spinal

CPG. Stimulation of these three structures at higher

strengths, or with longer trains, may produce changes

in the timing of the step cycle as well as in the magnitude of EMG activity. During locomotion, neurons within the LVN, PMRF, and red nucleus are phasically modulated at the frequency of the step cycle. Neurons in the LVN

are generally activated in phase with ipsilateral extensor muscles, whereas neurons in the red nucleus are generally active during the contralateral swing phase. Neurons in the PMRF have more complicated periods of activity and may discharge in relation to ipsilateral or contralateral flexor or extensor muscles. Brain stem structures also contribute to more com -plex activities during locomotion. For example, the red nucleus contributes to the complex modifications in

muscle activity required for precise modifications of

20/01/21 2:46 PM




Part V / Movement

Figure 33–13 Microstimulation

of the pontomedullary reticular

formation (PMRF) produces phase-

dependent responses in flexor and extensor muscles. (Data from T. Drew.) A. Stimulation of the left PMRF durring the swing phase of the left limb produces a transient increase in the

electromyogram activity of the left flexor muscles (lF) and a simultane -ous decrease in activity in the right extensor muscles (rE) (red arrows). There is little stimulus-evoked activity in the left extensor (lE) or right flexor (rF) muscles, which are inactive at this phase of the step cycle. B. Stimulation at the same location in the PMRF during the swing phase of the right limb produces the inverse

responses. C.  The phase-dependent nature of the responses is likely determined by the cyclical nature of the level of excit-

ability in interneurons that are part of the locomotor central pattern generator (CPG). Responses are gated by activity in the flexor (F) and extensor (E) parts of the locomotor CPG. When the first stimulation arrives, flexor interneurons in the left CPG (lF) are active, whereas those in the right CPG (rF) are inactive. The stimulation therefore produces a response only in the left flexor motor neurons (lFmn). When the second stimulation arrives, flexor interneurons in the right CPG (rF) are active, whereas those on the left side are inactive, and therefore, the stimulation elicits a response only in the flexor motor neurons on the right (rFmn).

<!-- image -->

gait (see below). In a complementary manner, the wide-

spread effects of the PMRF on multiple limbs allow it

to produce the coordinated changes in postural activ-

ity that accompany gait modifications. The coordination between gait modifications and postural activity is assured by the strong connections from the motor cortex to the PMRF in the same manner as for discrete voluntary movements (Chapter 34). The PMRF also contributes to the compensatory changes in posture that occur as a consequence of perturbations. In this situation, it forms part of a spino-bulbo-spinal reflex that contributes to the widespread postural responses

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 804

lE

that follow the immediate spinal reflexes activated by

a sudden perturbation.

Visually Guided Locomotion Involves the

Motor Cortex

## Walking is most often guided by vision, and the motor cortex is largely essential for visually guided move-

ment, especially when gait must be modified to ensure

precise control over limb trajectory and foot placement. In mammals, lesions of the motor cortex do not

20/01/21 2:46 PM

A Left exion and right extension B Right exion and left extension prevent animals from walking on a smooth floor, but they severely impair "precision locomotion," which requires a high degree of visuomotor coordination, such as walking on the rungs of a horizontal ladder, stepping over a series of barriers, and stepping over single objects placed on a treadmill belt. Experiments in intact cats trained to step over obstacles attached to a moving treadmill belt show that precision locomotion is associated with consider- Chapter 33 / Locomotion


in a similar manner to what occurs during reaching

(see Figure 34–21). Such subpopulations of neurons

may serve to modify the activity of the groups of syn-

ergistic muscles required to produce flexible changes in limb trajectory. Many of these cortical neurons project directly to the spinal cord (corticospinal neurons) and thus may regulate the activity of spinal interneurons, including

able modulation of the activity of numerous neurons in the motor cortex (Figure 33–14). Other neurons in the motor cortex show a more discrete pattern of activity and are activated sequentially during different parts of the swing phase. The activity of these cortical neurons correlates with the periods of modified muscle activity required to produce the gait modifications those within the CPG, thereby adapting the timing and magnitude of motor activity to a specific locomotor task. Brief trains of electrical stimulation applied to either the motor cortex or the corticospinal tract in normal walking cats produce transient responses in the contralateral limb in a phase-dependent manner, similar to that produced by activity in various brain stem structures. However, in contrast to the situation

Record motor cortex

<!-- image -->

Figure 33–14 Stepping movements

are adapted by the motor cortex in

response to visual inputs.  When a cat

steps over a visible object fixed to a treadmill, neurons in the motor cortex increase in activity. This increase in cortical activity is associated with enhanced activity in foreleg muscles, as seen in the electromyograms (EMG). (Adapted, with permission, from Drew 1988.)

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 805

<!-- image -->

Motor

cortex

unit

EMGs from

foreleg exor

muscles

20/01/21 2:46 PM


Part V / Movement

observed with brain stem structures, increasing the

duration of the stimulation train applied to the motor

cortex frequently results in a reset of the locomo-

tor rhythm, characterized as an interruption of the ongoing step cycle and the initiation of a new step cycle. This suggests that in mammals the corticospinal tract has privileged access to the rhythm generator of the CPG. Planning of Locomotion Involves the

Posterior Parietal Cortex

## When humans and animals approach an obstacle in their pathway, they must adjust their walking pattern

to move around the obstacle or step over it. Planning

of these adjustments begins two or three steps before the obstacle is reached. Recent experiments suggest that the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is particularly involved in planning gait modifications. Lesions in this region cause walking cats to misplace the positioning of their paws as they approach an obstacle and increase the probability that one or more legs contact the obstacle as they step over it. In contrast to what is observed in the motor cortex, recordings in PPC show that many neurons increase their activity in advance of the step over the obsta- in part, on neuronal systems in the PPC. With bilateral lesions or cooling of the medial PPC, the memory is completely abolished (Figure 33–16A). Complement- ing this observation is the finding that the activity of some neurons in the PPC is elevated during a step over an obstacle, as well as throughout the time the animal straddles the obstacle (Figure 33–16B). This activity could represent the working memory of key features of the obstacle such as height. The Cerebellum Regulates the Timing and Intensity of Descending Signals

## Damage to the cerebellum results in marked abnormalities in locomotor movements, including the need

for a widened base of support, impaired coordination

of joints, and abnormal coupling between limbs during stepping. These symptoms, which are characteristic of ataxia (Chapter 37), indicate that the cerebellum contributes importantly to the regulation of locomotion. A major function of the cerebellum is to correct movement based on a comparison of the motor signals sent to the spinal cord and the movement pro-

-duced by that motor command (Chapter 37). In the context of locomotion, the motor signal is generated by neurons in the motor cortex and brain stem nuclei. Information about the movement comes from the ascending spinocerebellar pathways. For the hind legs of the cat, these are the dorsal and ventral spinocerebellar tracts. Neurons in the dorsal spinocerebellar tract (DSCT neurons) are strongly activated by numerous leg proprioceptors and thus provide the cerebellum with detailed information about the mechanical state of the hind legs. In contrast, neurons in the ventral tract (VSCT neurons) are activated primarily by interneurons in the CPG, thus providing the cerebellum with information about the state of the spinal locomotor network. During locomotion, the motor command (the central efference copy), the movement (the afference copy, via the DSCT), and the state of the spinal networks

cle. Moreover, many cells in the PPC discharge similarly regardless of which leg is first to step over the obstacle (Figure 33–15A,B). Such cells may provide an estimation of the position of the body with respect to objects in the environment (Figure 33–15B), allowing animals to modify gait as they approach the obstacle. The manner in which the PPC interacts with other cor tical and subcortical structures generally considered to be involved in motor planning is unknown. However, recent work shows that the premotor cortex also makes an important contribution to planning visually guided gait modifications (Figure 33–15C) and may be implicated in the transformation of a global signal providing information concerning obstacle location to the muscle-based signal necessary for the execution of the step over the obstacle. Visual information about the size and location of an obstacle is also stored in working memory, a form of short-term memory (Chapter 52). This information is

used to ensure that gait modifications in the hindlimb are coordinated with those of the forelimb and is nec essary because the obstacle is no longer within the visual field by the time the hindlimbs are stepping over it. The neurobiological mechanisms underlying this form of working memory remain to be established, but the persistence of the memory appears to depend, at least

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 806

-(the spinal efference copy, via the VSCT) are integrated within the cerebellum and expressed as changes in the pattern of rhythmical discharge of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex and neurons in the deep cerebellar nuclei. These signals from the deep cerebellar nuclei are then sent to the motor cortex and the various brain stem nuclei where they modulate descending signals to the spinal cord to correct any motor errors. Behavioral experiments show that the cerebellum also plays an important role in the adaptation of gait. For example, when subjects walk on a split treadmill,

20/01/21 2:46 PM

A. Activity of a PPC neuron in the right cortex during a step Chapter 33 / Locomotion Recording from neuron in posterior parietal cortex

over the obstacle when the left or right forelimb is the first to step over the obstacle. In each situation, the cell in the PPC

<!-- image -->

discharges two to three steps in advance of the step over the obstacle. B.  The observation that PPC neurons discharge independent of which limb is the first to step over the obstacle suggests a global function of PPC in the planning of locomotion. In a gen-

eral scheme, the PPC neurons are involved in the estimation of

so that each leg walks at a different speed, they initially

show a very asymmetric gait before adapting over time

to a more asymmetric one. When the two treadmill

belts are reset to the same speed, they again show an asymmetric gait, demonstrating that the experimental condition had produced adaptation (see Figure 30–13). Patients with damage to the cerebellum are not able to adapt to this condition.

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 807

in the PPC for later retrieval.

C.  The PPC does not act alone in planning gait modifications. It is part of a cortical and subcortical network that includes, among other structures, the premotor cortex, the basal ganglia,

- and the cerebellum. Connections exist between each of these structures as well as between each of them and the motor corrtex, which is responsible for the execution of the gait modification. (Abbreviation: CPG, central pattern generator.) (Adapted, with permission, from Drew and Marigold 2015.)

The Basal Ganglia Modify Cortical and

Brain Stem Circuits

## The basal ganglia are found in all vertebrates from the oldest vertebrates to primates and probably con-

tribute to the selection of different motor patterns.

The importance of the basal ganglia to the control of locomotion is clearly demonstrated by the deficits in

20/01/21 2:46 PM

Posterior

parietal cortex

Motor planning:

dynamic limb state-

object coupling and

limb coordination



Part V / Movement

A

Straddle obstacle;

obstacle is lowered Hind legs step high to avoid remembered position of obstacle Left limb leads over obstacle

<!-- image -->

ory during locomotion.

A.  Upper figure: Normal animals were trained to walk forward, step over an obstacle, and then pause. While the animal paused, the obstacle was removed. When walking resumed,

the hind legs stepped high to avoid the remembered obstacle. This memory lasted for more than 30 seconds. The trajectory of the hindlimbs was scaled appropriately for the height of the obstacle and for the relative position of the hind paws. Bilateral lesions of the PPC led to an impairment in the memory, making it impossible for the animal to pass the obstacle without hitting it. Lower figure: Following the lesion, animals stored the memory for only 1 to 2 seconds, and the maximum height of the locomotion observed in patients with Parkinson dis-

ease, which disrupts the normal functioning of the

basal ganglia due to degradation of their dopamin-

ergic inputs from the substantia nigra (Chapter 38). Such patients show a characteristic slow, shuffling gait and, in later stages of the disease, can also show "freezing" of gait. Patients with Parkinson disease also

show problems with balance during locomotion and

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 808

Pearson 2009.)

B. Upper figure: Neurons recorded in an intact animal in the PPC on the right side discharged in the period between the passage of the left forelimb (lFL) and hindlimb (lHL) over an

obstacle (represented by electromyogram activity from representative flexor muscles in each limb). This discharge may be used to coordinate the movement of the hindlimb with that of the forelimb during the visually guided gait modification. Lower figure: When the cat steps over an obstacle and pauses, as in part A, cells in the PPC show a maintained discharge that could provide the neural representation of the working memory. (Adapted, with permission, from Lajoie et al. 2010.) with the anticipatory postural adjustments that occur

at the initiation of a gait pattern. These deficits suggest

that the basal ganglia contribute to the initiation, regula-

tion, and modification of gait patterns. This regulation is mediated by the two major projections of the basal ganglia to the brain stem pathways and cortical structures. The basal ganglia influence brain stem activity through their projections to the PPN. The PPN receives

20/01/21 2:46 PM

B

Hindlimbs

step over inhibitory inputs from GABAergic inhibitory neu- rons in the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) as well as from the globus pallidus pars interna (GPi);

it also receives glutamatergic input from neurons in the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Decreased inhibitory input and increased glutamatergic input to PPN from the basal ganglia are thought to promote activity in PPN and favor exploratory locomotion. The STN and GPi are major targets of deep brain stimulation for improvement of motor symptoms such as rigidity and reduced mobility in patients with Parkinson disease. The basal ganglia influence cortical activity by means of its connections via the thalamus to different parts of the frontal cortex, including the supplemen-

tary motor regions. These connections allow the basal ganglia to exert a modulatory effect on visually guided locomotion, possibly by selecting the appropriate motor patterns required in different behavioral situations. Computational Neuroscience Provides Insights Into Locomotor Circuits

## While functional studies have revealed much about the organization of the locomotor networks, their over-

all complexity makes it difficult to capture the integra- Chapter 33 / Locomotion


Nonetheless, the available evidence suggests that all

the major principles concerning the origin and regula-

tion of walking in quadrupeds also pertain to locomo-

tion in humans. Although the issue of whether CPGs exist in humans remains contentious, several observations are compatible with the view that CPGs are important for human locomotion. For example, observations of some patients with spinal cord injury parallel the findings from studies of spinal cats. Striking cases of patients with nearly

complete transection of the spinal cord have shown uncontrollable, spontaneous, rhythmic movements of the legs when the hips were extended. This behavior closely parallels the rhythmic stepping movements in chronic spinal cats. Moreover, tonic electrical stimulation of the spinal cord below the injury can evoke locomotor-like activity, as in other mammals. Parallels between human and quadrupedal walking have also been found in patients trained after spinal cord injury. Daily training combined with drug treat-

ments restores stepping in spinal cats and improves stepping in patients with chronic spinal injuries. People with severe spinal cord injury who have been exposed to both treadmill-induced stepping and drug treatments similar to those that have been shown to activate the CPG in cats have demonstrated dramatic improvements in the ability to produce locomotion (Box 33–4). These results suggest that CPGs are present in humans and share functional similarities with CPGs found in other vertebrates. Compelling evidence for the existence of spinal CPGs in humans also comes from studies in human infants who make rhythmic stepping movements

-immediately after birth if held upright and moved over a horizontal surface. This strongly suggests that some of the basic neuronal circuits for locomotion are innate and present at birth when descending control systems are not well developed. Because stepping can also occur in infants who lack cerebral hemispheres (anencephaly), these circuits must be located at or below the brain stem, perhaps entirely within the spinal cord. During the first year of life, as automatic stepping is transformed into functional walking, these basic circuits are thought to be brought under supraspinal

tive function of synaptic and cellular properties of the circuit. Computational network modeling, however, allows one to simulate the circuit activity and to investigate the dynamic interactions between the circuit elements. Computational models can be developed at many levels: to study the ionic basis of neural activity within a given circuit, to study the connectivity between different groups of neurons in a particular circuit, or to better understand the interactions between different structures in the locomotor network. Computational models at each of these levels have been devel oped to study rhythm and pattern generation in both invertebrates and vertebrates and in the latter, ranging from the lamprey to mammals. As in other domains, approaches combining experimental manipulation and computational modeling are likely to increase in the coming years and have the potential to advance our understanding of the complex systems and interconnections between structures that are required to produce the full locomotor repertoire. Neuronal Control of Human Locomotion Is Similar to That of Quadrupeds

## By necessity, most of our understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying the control of locomotion

comes from experiments on quadrupedal animals.

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 809

control. In particular, the stepping pattern gradually develops from a more primitive flexion-extension pattern that generates little effective forward movement to the mature pattern of complex movements. It is plausible, based on studies of cats, that this adaptation reflects maturation of descending systems that originate in the motor cortex and brain stem nuclei and are modulated by the cerebellum.

20/01/21 2:46 PM


Part V / Movement

Box 33–4 Rehabilitative Training Improves Walking After Spinal Cord Injury in Humans

## According to the World Health Organization, between 250,000 and 500,000 people worldwide incur spinal weight-supported stepping on a treadmill (Figure 33–17). This technique is based on the observation that spinal

cords injuries annually. For many, this results in per-

manent loss of sensation, movement, and autonomic function. The devastating loss of functional abilities, together with the enormous cost of treatment and care, creates an urgent need for effective methods to repair the injured spinal cord and to facilitate functional recovery. Over the past decades, progress has been made in animal research aimed at preventing secondary damage after injury, repairing the axons of lesioned neurons

in the spinal cord, and promoting the regeneration of severed axons through and beyond the site of injury. In many instances, the regeneration of axons has been associated with modest recovery of locomotor function. However, none of the regeneration strategies has reached the point where they can be confidently used in humans with spinal cord injury. Thus, rehabilitative training is the preferred treatment for people with spinal cord injury. One especially successful technique for enhancing walking in patients

with partial damage to the spinal cord is repetitive, A B

Weight support

Harness

Figure 33–17 Treadmill training improves locomotor

function in patients with partial spinal cord injury.


<!-- image -->

A.  The patient is partially supported on a moving treadmill cats and rodents can be trained to step with their hind legs on a moving treadmill. For humans, partial support of the body weight through a harness system is critical to the success of training; presumably, it facilitates the training of spinal cord circuits by reducing the requirements for supraspinal control of posture and balance. Although the neural basis for the improvement in locomotor function with treadmill training has not been established, it is thought to depend on synaptic plastic- ity in local spinal circuits as well as successful transmission of at least some command signals from the brain through preserved descending pathways if the spinal cord injury is only partial. Locomotor training is sometimes combined with other treatments. These include different types of medication designed to reduce spasticity, seen as involuntary muscle contractions, and facilitation of activity in spinal circuits by electrical transcutaneous activation of spinal circuits and/or activation of corticospinal pathways by transcranial magnetic stimulation.

Before training After training

by a harness, and stepping movements are assisted by therapists.

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 810


B. Locomotor function improvement in 44 patients with

chronic spinal cord injury after daily training lasting from 3

to 20 weeks. The functional rating ranges from 0 (unable to

stand or walk) to 5 (walking without devices for more than five steps). (Adapted, with permission, from Wernig et al. 1995. Copyright © 2006, John Wiley and Sons.)

20/01/21 2:46 PM

At the cortical level, stroke involving the motor

cortex or damage to the corticospinal tracts leads

to deficits in locomotion, as in cats. However, the

deficits in humans are much stronger than in cats or even nonhuman primates, suggesting that the motor cortex in humans plays a more important role in locomotion than in other mammals. Studies using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to modulate motor cortical activity also show that the motor cortex contributes importantly to the control of human locomotion. TMS parameters that result in cortical inactivation, for example, produce a decrease in the level of muscle activity during locomotion. In contrast, TMS parameters that activate the motor cortex improve the recovery of locomotion following incomplete spinal cord injury. Imaging studies, together with high-resolution electroencephalogram recordings, show changes in the activity of several cortical regions, including the motor

cortex, premotor cortex, and PPC, during locomotion and particularly during imagined locomotion over obstacles. Imaging studies have also shown increased activity during locomotion in those parts of the midbrain shown to be important for the initiation and speed control of locomotion in animals. Similarly, neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus can be affected in Parkinson disease, contributing to the severe gait disturbances seen in the late phase of the disease. Highlights

1.

Locomotion is a highly conserved behavior that

is essential for the survival of the species. Our

understanding of the neuronal mechanisms

- involved in the generation and control of locomotion came initially from the study of phylogenetically older animals, such as the lamprey and the tadpole. More recently, in mammals, with their more complex nervous systems, the organization of the different neural pathways involved in the generation and regulation of locomotion has also been determined in significant detail. 2. The spinal cord, in isolation from descending and rhythmical peripheral afferent inputs, can generate a complex locomotor pattern that contains
- elements of the rhythms and patterns observed in intact animals. The circuits responsible for producing this activity are referred to as central pattern generators (CPGs). Activity in spinal circuits can be modified by experience. 3. The basic components of CPGs controlling swimming are excitatory rhythm-generating neurons

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 811

Chapter 33 / Locomotion


together with commissural inhibitory neurons

responsible for left–right alternation. This organ-

izational principle is also found in CPGs con-

- trolling limbed movements with the addition of flexor-extensor pattern-generating circuits and additional commissural neuronal networks. The circuits in the locomotor networks have a modular organization with distinct transmitter and molecular codes for the constituent neurons. Descending command signals act on these circuit elements to produce the diverse aspects of locomotor behavior. 4. Ionic membrane properties in interneurons and motor neurons contribute to rhythm and pattern generation. Cell-specific manipulation of these
- properties will enable a precise understanding of their relative contributions to locomotor production. 5. Peripheral afferent inputs modulate the function of spinal locomotor circuits. Proprioceptive sensors are used to stabilize phase transitions
- between stance and swing (and vice versa), whereas input from exteroceptors is used to modify limb activity in response to unexpected perturbations. 6. Circuits that are involved in initiating locomotion, controlling speed of locomotion, and selecting gaits are localized in the midbrain and
- encompass excitatory neurons in the pedunculopontine and cuneiform nuclei. These excitatory nuclei serve diverse roles in controlling either slow explorative locomotion or the full range of speeds and gaits including fast escape locomotion. Molecular-genetically driven cell-specific approaches allow unparalleled access to the organization of these pathways in the brain stem and how they integrate with spinal locomotor networks. 7. Activity in the three main structures in the brain stem with axons that descend to the spinal cord (the pontomedullary reticular formation, the
- lateral vestibular nucleus, and the red nucleus) contributes to the control of posture and interlimb coordination. Signals from these structures modify the level of muscle activity in a structurespecific manner. 8. The motor cortex provides precise control of muscle activity patterns to allow animals to make visually guided anticipatory adjustments
- of their gait. The signal from the motor cortex is integrated into the ongoing rhythm. 9. The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is part of a network that contributes to the advanced planning

20/01/21 2:46 PM
At the cortical level, stroke involving the motor

cortex or damage to the corticospinal tracts leads

to deficits in locomotion, as in cats. However, the

deficits in humans are much stronger than in cats or even nonhuman primates, suggesting that the motor cortex in humans plays a more important role in locomotion than in other mammals. Studies using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to modulate motor cortical activity also show that the motor cortex contributes importantly to the control of human locomotion. TMS parameters that result in cortical inactivation, for example, produce a decrease in the level of muscle activity during locomotion. In contrast, TMS parameters that activate the motor cortex improve the recovery of locomotion following incomplete spinal cord injury. Imaging studies, together with high-resolution electroencephalogram recordings, show changes in the activity of several cortical regions, including the motor

cortex, premotor cortex, and PPC, during locomotion and particularly during imagined locomotion over obstacles. Imaging studies have also shown increased activity during locomotion in those parts of the midbrain shown to be important for the initiation and speed control of locomotion in animals. Similarly, neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus can be affected in Parkinson disease, contributing to the severe gait disturbances seen in the late phase of the disease. Highlights

1.

Locomotion is a highly conserved behavior that

is essential for the survival of the species. Our

understanding of the neuronal mechanisms

- involved in the generation and control of locomotion came initially from the study of phylogenetically older animals, such as the lamprey and the tadpole. More recently, in mammals, with their more complex nervous systems, the organization of the different neural pathways involved in the generation and regulation of locomotion has also been determined in significant detail. 2. The spinal cord, in isolation from descending and rhythmical peripheral afferent inputs, can generate a complex locomotor pattern that contains
- elements of the rhythms and patterns observed in intact animals. The circuits responsible for producing this activity are referred to as central pattern generators (CPGs). Activity in spinal circuits can be modified by experience. 3. The basic components of CPGs controlling swimming are excitatory rhythm-generating neurons

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 811

Chapter 33 / Locomotion


together with commissural inhibitory neurons

responsible for left–right alternation. This organ-

izational principle is also found in CPGs con-

- trolling limbed movements with the addition of flexor-extensor pattern-generating circuits and additional commissural neuronal networks. The circuits in the locomotor networks have a modular organization with distinct transmitter and molecular codes for the constituent neurons. Descending command signals act on these circuit elements to produce the diverse aspects of locomotor behavior. 4. Ionic membrane properties in interneurons and motor neurons contribute to rhythm and pattern generation. Cell-specific manipulation of these
- properties will enable a precise understanding of their relative contributions to locomotor production. 5. Peripheral afferent inputs modulate the function of spinal locomotor circuits. Proprioceptive sensors are used to stabilize phase transitions
- between stance and swing (and vice versa), whereas input from exteroceptors is used to modify limb activity in response to unexpected perturbations. 6. Circuits that are involved in initiating locomotion, controlling speed of locomotion, and selecting gaits are localized in the midbrain and
- encompass excitatory neurons in the pedunculopontine and cuneiform nuclei. These excitatory nuclei serve diverse roles in controlling either slow explorative locomotion or the full range of speeds and gaits including fast escape locomotion. Molecular-genetically driven cell-specific approaches allow unparalleled access to the organization of these pathways in the brain stem and how they integrate with spinal locomotor networks. 7. Activity in the three main structures in the brain stem with axons that descend to the spinal cord (the pontomedullary reticular formation, the
- lateral vestibular nucleus, and the red nucleus) contributes to the control of posture and interlimb coordination. Signals from these structures modify the level of muscle activity in a structurespecific manner. 8. The motor cortex provides precise control of muscle activity patterns to allow animals to make visually guided anticipatory adjustments
- of their gait. The signal from the motor cortex is integrated into the ongoing rhythm. 9. The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is part of a network that contributes to the advanced planning

20/01/21 2:46 PM


Part V / Movement

of gait based on visual information. PPC neu-

rons estimate the relative location of objects

with respect to the body and retain information

- in working memory to facilitate coordination of the limbs. The contribution of other cortical and subcortical areas to locomotor planning remains little studied. 10. Inputs from the cerebellum and the basal ganglia are used to correct motor errors and select the appropriate patterns of motor activity. The contri-
- bution of the basal ganglia to the control of locomotion is complex and is only now being determined. 11. The available evidence suggests that the neural control mechanisms determined from experiments in animals are also used to control locomo

Jankowska E. 2008. Spinal interneuronal networks in the cat:

elementary components. Brain Res Rev 57:46–55.

Kiehn O. 2016. Decoding the organization of spinal circuits

- that control locomotion. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:224–238. Orlovsky G, Deliagina TG, Grillner S. 1999. Neuronal Control of
- Locomotion: From Mollusc to Man. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. Pearson KG. 2008. Role of sensory feedback in the control of
- stance duration in walking cats. Brain Res Rev 57:222–227. Rossignol S. 1996. Neural control of stereotypic limb move-
- ments. Supplement 29. In: Handbook of Physiology, Exercise: Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems. New York:
- Wiley-Blackwell. Sherrington CS. 1913. Further observations on the production of reflex stepping by combination of reflex excitation with reflex inhibition. J Physiol 47:196–214.
- -Takakusaki K, Chiba R, Nozu T, Okumura T. 2016. Brainstem control of locomotion and muscle tone with special reference to the role of the mesopontine tegmentum and med-
- ullary reticulospinal systems. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 123:695–729. References

Ampatzis K, Song J, Ausborn J, El Manira A. 2014. Separate

microcircuit modules of distinct v2a interneurons and

motoneurons control the speed of locomotion. Neuron

- 83:934–943. Bouvier J, Caggiano V, Leiras R, et al. 2015. Descending command neurons in the brain stem that halt locomotion. Cell 163:1191–1203.
- Brocard F, Tazerart S, Vinay L. 2010. Do pacemakers drive the central pattern generator for locomotion in mammals? Neuroscientist 16:139–155.
- Buchanan JT, Grillner S. 1987. Newly identified "glutamate interneurons" and their role in locomotion in the lamprey spinal cord. Science 236:312–314.
- tion in humans, including the existence of a CPG. Major advances remain to be made in understanding the mechanisms of spinal and supraspinal influences on human locomotor control. 12. Recent technological advances now give us an unparalleled opportunity to investigate the control mechanisms underlying locomotion. Molec-
- ular and genetic advances provide the ability to manipulate behavior at both the cellular and systems level and allow detailed study of the contributions of brain stem and spinal circuits to the initiation and regulation of locomotion. Advances in multineuronal recording techniques in animals, as well as the development of high-resolution recordings of human brain activity, will facilitate our understanding of the contribution of cortical structures to the control of locomotion.
- Butt SJ, Kiehn O. 2003. Functional identification of interneurons responsible for left-right coordination of hindlimbs in mammals. Neuron 38:953–963.
- Trevor Drew Caggiano V, Leiras R, Goni-Erro H, et al. 2018. Midbrain circuits that set locomotor speed and gait selection. Nature 553:455–460.
- Ole Kiehn Capelli P, Pivetta C, Soledad Esposito M, Arber S. 2017. Locomotor speed control circuits in the caudal brainstem. Nature 551:373–377.
- Choi JT, Bouyer LJ, Nielsen JB. 2015. Disruption of locomotor adaptation with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation over the motor cortex. Cereb Cortex 25:1981–1986.

Suggested Reading

Armstrong DM. 1988. The supraspinal control of mamma-

lian locomotion. J Physiol 405:1–37.

## Brown T. 1911. The intrinsic factors in the act of progression

- in mammals. Proc R Soc B 84:308–319. Drew T, Andujar JE, Lajoie K, Yakovenko S. 2008. Cortical
- mechanisms involved in visuomotor coordination during precision walking. Brain Res Rev 57:199–211.
- Grillner S. 2006. Biological pattern generation: the cellular and computational logic of networks in motion. Neuron 52:751–766.

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 812

- Conway BA, Hultborn H, Kiehn O. 1987. Proprioceptive input resets central locomotor rhythm in the spinal cat. Exp Brain Res 68:643–656.
- Crone SA, Quinlan KA, Zagoraiou L, et al. 2008. Genetic ablation of V2a ipsilateral interneurons disrupts left-right locomotor coordination in mammalian spinal cord. Neuron
- 60:70–83. Dougherty KJ, Zagoraiou L, Satoh D, et al. 2013. Locomotor rhythm generation linked to the output of spinal shox2 excitatory interneurons. Neuron 80:920–933.

20/01/21 2:46 PM

Drew T. 1988. Motor cortical cell discharge during voluntary

gait modification. Brain Res 457:181–187.

Drew T. 1991. Functional organization within the medul-

- lary reticular formation of the intact unanesthetized cat. III. Microstimulation during locomotion. J Neurophysiol
- 66:919–938. Drew T, Dubuc R, Rossignol S. 1986. Discharge patterns of reticulospinal and other reticular neurons in chronic, unrestrained cats walking on a treadmill. J Neurophysiol
- 55:375–401. Drew T, Marigold DS. 2015. Taking the next step: cortical contributions to the control of locomotion. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33C:25–33.
- Dubuc R, Brocard F, Antri M, et al. 2008. Initiation of locomotion in lampreys. Brain Res Rev 57:172–182. Edgerton VR, Leon RD, Harkema SJ, et al. 2001. Retraining
- the injured spinal cord. J Physiol 533:15–22. Engberg I, Lundberg A. 1969. An electromyographic analy-
- sis of muscular activity in the hindlimb of the cat during unrestrained locomotion. Acta Physiol Scand 75:614–630.
- Forssberg H. 1985. Ontogeny of human locomotor control. I. Infant stepping, supported locomotion and transition to independent locomotion. Exp Brain Res 57:480–493.
- Goulding M. 2009. Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: moving in a new direction. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:507–518.
- Grillner S. 2006. Biological pattern generation: the cellular and computational logic of networks in motion. Neuron 52:751–766.
- Grillner S. 1981. Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods, and fish. In: V Brooks (ed). Handbook of Physiology. Rockville, MD: American Physiological Society.
- Grillner S, Jessell TM. 2009. Measured motion: searching for simplicity in spinal locomotor networks. Curr Opin Neurobiol 19:572–586.
- Grillner S, Rossignol S. 1978. On the initiation of the swing phase of locomotion in chronic spinal cats. Brain Res 146:269–277.
- Grillner S, Zangger P. 1979. On the central generation of locomotion in the low spinal cat. Exp Brain Res 34:241–261. Grillner S, Zangger P. 1984. The effect of dorsal root transec-
- tion on the efferent motor pattern in the cat's hindlimb during locomotion. Acta Physiol Scand 120:393–405.
- Hagglund M, Borgius L, Dougherty KJ, Kiehn O. 2010. Activation of groups of excitatory neurons in the mammalian spinal cord or hindbrain evokes locomotion. Nat Neurosci
- 13:246–252. Harris-Warrick RM. 2011. Neuromodulation and flexibility in central pattern generator networks. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21:685–692.

Chapter 33 / Locomotion


Hultborn H, Nielsen JB. 2007. Spinal control of locomotion—

from cat to man. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 189:111–121.

Jessell TM. 2000. Neuronal specification in the spinal cord:

- inductive signals and transcriptional codes. Nat Rev Genet 1:20–29.
- Jordan LM, Liu J, Hedlund PB, Akay T, Pearson KG. 2008. Descending command systems for the initiation of locomotion in mammals. Brain Res Rev 57:183–191.
- Juvin L, Gratsch S, Trillaud-Doppia E, Gariepy JF, Buschges A, Dubuc R. 2016. A specific population of reticulospinal neurons controls the termination of locomotion. Cell Rep
- 15:2377–2386. Kiehn O. 2006. Locomotor circuits in the mammalian spinal cord. Annu Rev Neurosci 29:279–306. Kiehn O, Sillar KT, Kjaerulff O, McDearmid JR. 1999. Effects
- of noradrenaline on locomotor rhythm-generating networks in the isolated neonatal rat spinal cord. J Neurophysiol
- 82:741–746. Kriellaars DJ, Brownstone RM, Noga BR, Jordan LM. 1994. Mechanical entrainment of fictive locomotion in the decerebrate cat. J Neurophysiol 71:2074–2086.
- Lajoie K, Andujar JE, Pearson K, Drew T. 2010. Neurons in area 5 of the posterior parietal cortex in the cat contribute to interlimb coordination during visually guided
- locomotion: a role in working memory. J Neurophysiol 103:2234–2254. Lanuza GM, Gosgnach S, Pierani A, Jessell TM, Goulding M. 2004. Genetic identification of spinal interneurons that coordinate left-right locomotor activity necessary for
- walking movements. Neuron 42:375–386. McCrea DA, Rybak IA. 2007. Modeling the mammalian locomotor CPG: insights from mistakes and perturbations. Prog Brain Res 165:235–253.
- McLean DL, Masino MA, Koh IY, Lindquist WB, Fetcho JR. 2008. Continuous shifts in the active set of spinal interneurons during changes in locomotor speed. Nat Neurosci
- 11:1419–1429. McVea DA, Pearson KG. 2009. Object avoidance during locomotion. Adv Exp Med Biol 629:293–315. Pearson KG, Rossignol S. 1991. Fictive motor patterns in
- chronic spinal cats. J Neurophysiol 66:1874–1887. Picton LD, Sillar KT. 2016. Mechanisms underlying the
- endogenous dopaminergic inhibition of spinal locomotor circuit function in Xenopus tadpoles. Sci Rep 6:35749.
- Rossignol S, Frigon A. 2011. Recovery of locomotion after spinal cord injury: some facts and mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 34:413–440.
- Rybak IA, Stecina K, Shevtsova NA, McCrea DA. 2006. Modelling spinal circuitry involved in locomotor pattern generation: insights from the effects of afferent stimulation.
- Hiebert GW, Whelan PJ, Prochazka A, Pearson KG. 1996. Contribution of hind limb flexor muscle afferents to the tim ing of phase transitions in the cat step cycle. J Neurophysiol
- 75:1126–1137. Hounsgaard J, Hultborn H, Kiehn O. 1986. Transmittercontrolled properties of alpha-motoneurones causing long-lasting motor discharge to brief excitatory inputs.
- Prog Brain Res 64:39–49.

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 813

- -J Physiol 577:641–658. Ryczko D, Dubuc R. 2013. The multifunctional mesencephalic locomotor region. Curr Pharm Des 19:4448–4470. Shik M, Severin F, Orlovskii G. 1966. [Control of walking and
- running by means of electric stimulation of the midbrain]. Biofizika 11:659–666. [article in Russian]
- Soffe SR, Roberts A, Li WC. 2009. Defining the excitatory neurons that drive the locomotor rhythm in a simple

20/01/21 2:46 PM


Part V / Movement

vertebrate: insights into the origin of reticulospinal con-

trol. J Physiol 587:4829–4844.

Talpalar AE, Bouvier J, Borgius L, Fortin G, Pierani A, Kiehn

O. 2013. Dual-mode operation of neuronal networks involved in left-right alternation. Nature 500:85–88.

- Talpalar AE, Endo T, Low P, et al. 2011. Identification of minimal neuronal networks involved in flexor-extensor alternation in the mammalian spinal cord. Neuron 71:
- 1071–1084. Wernig A, Muller S, Nanassy A, Cagol E. 1995. Laufband therapy based on 'rules of spinal locomotion' is effective in spinal cord injured persons. Eur J Neurosci 7:823–829.
- Whelan PJ, Hiebert GW, Pearson KG. 1995. Stimulation of the group I extensor afferents prolongs the stance phase in walking cats. Exp Brain Res 103:20–30.

Kandel-Ch33\_0783-0814.indd 814

Yang JF, Mitton M, Musselman KE, Patrick SK, Tajino J.

2015. Characteristics of the developing human locomotor

system: similarities to other mammals. Dev Psychobiol

- 57:397–408. Zagoraiou L, Akay T, Martin JF, Brownstone RM, Jessell TM, Miles GB. 2009. A cluster of cholinergic premotor interneurons modulates mouse locomotor activity. Neuron
- 64:645–662. Zhang J, Lanuza GM, Britz O, et al. 2014. V1 and v2b interneurons secure the alternating flexor-extensor motor activity mice require for limbed locomotion. Neuron 82:138–150.
- Zhang Y, Narayan S, Geiman E, et al. 2008. V3 spinal neurons establish a robust and balanced locomotor rhythm during walking. Neuron 60:84–96.

20/01/21 2:46 PM


Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices

Voluntary Movement Is the Physical Manifestation of an

Intention to Act

Theoretical Frameworks Help Interpret Behavior and the

## Neural Basis of Voluntary Control Many Frontal and Parietal Cortical Regions Are Involved

in Voluntary Control Descending Motor Commands Are Principally

Transmitted by the Corticospinal Tract Imposing a Delay Period Before the Onset of Movement

Isolates the Neural Activity Associated With Planning From That Associated With Executing the Action

Parietal Cortex Provides Information About the World and the Body for State Estimation to Plan and Execute Motor Actions

## The Parietal Cortex Links Sensory Information to Motor Actions Body Position and Motion Are Represented in Several

Areas of Posterior Parietal Cortex Spatial Goals Are Represented in Several Areas of

Posterior Parietal Cortex Internally Generated Feedback May Influence

Parietal Cortex Activity Premotor Cortex Supports Motor Selection and Planning

Medial Premotor Cortex Is Involved in the Contextual Control of Voluntary Actions

## Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning

Sensory-Guided Movement of the Arm Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Applying Rules

(Associations) That Govern Behavior Ventral Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning Motor

Actions of the Hand Premotor Cortex May Contribute to Perceptual

Decisions That Guide Motor Actions

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 815

Several Cortical Motor Areas Are Active When the Motor

Actions of Others Are Being Observed

Many Aspects of Voluntary Control Are Distributed

Across Parietal and Premotor Cortex The Primary Motor Cortex Plays an Important Role

in Motor Execution The Primary Motor Cortex Includes a Detailed Map of

## the Motor Periphery Some Neurons in the Primary Motor Cortex Project

Directly to Spinal Motor Neurons Activity in the Primary Motor Cortex Reflects Many

Spatial and Temporal Features of Motor Output Primary Motor Cortical Activity Also Reflects

Higher-Order Features of Movement Sensory Feedback Is Transmitted Rapidly to the Primary

Motor Cortex and Other Cortical Regions The Primary Motor Cortex Is Dynamic and Adaptable

Highlights


n this chapter, we describe how the cerebral

cortex uses sensory information from the external

world to guide motor actions that allow the indi-

vidual to interact with the surrounding environment. We begin with a general description of what we mean by the term voluntary movement and some theoretical frameworks for understanding its control, followed by the basic anatomy of the cortical circuits involved in voluntary motor behavior. We then consider how information related to the body, external space, and behavioral goals is combined and processed in parietal cortical regions. This is followed by a discussion of the

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

role of premotor cortical regions in selecting and plan-

ning motor actions. Finally, we examine the role played

by the primary motor cortex in motor execution.

Voluntary Movement Is the Physical

Manifestation of an Intention to Act

## Animals, including humans, have a nervous system not just so that they can sense their world or think

about it, but primarily to interact with it to survive and

reproduce. Understanding how purposeful actions are achieved is one of the great challenges in neuroscience. We focus here on the cerebral cortical control of volun tary motor behavior, in particular voluntary arm and hand movements in primates. In contrast to stereotypical fixed-latency reflexive responses that are automatically triggered by incoming sensory stimuli (Chapter 32), voluntary movements movements or sequences of actions tailored to current conditions and to the longer-term objectives of the individual. The ability to use fingers, hands, and arms

-independent of locomotion further helps primates, and especially humans, exploit their environment. Most animals must search their environment for food when hungry. In contrast, humans can "forage" by using their hands to cook a meal or simply enter a few numbers on a cellphone to order food for delivery. Because large areas of the cerebral cortex are implicated in various aspects of voluntary motor control, the study of the cortical control of voluntary movement provides important insights into the purposive functional organization of the cerebral cortex as a whole. Theoretical Frameworks Help Interpret Behavior and the Neural Basis of Voluntary Control

are purposeful, intentional, and context-dependent, and are typically accompanied, at least in humans, by a sense of "ownership" of the actions, the sense that the actions have been willfully caused by the individual. Decisions to act are often made without an external trigger stimulus. Moreover, the continuous flux of events and conditions in the world presents changing opportunities for action, and thus voluntary action involves choices between alternatives, including the choice not to act. Finally, the same object or event can evoke different actions at different times, depending on the current context. Throughout evolution, these features of voluntary behavior have become increasingly prominent in higher primates, especially in humans, indicating

that the neural circuits controlling voluntary behavior in primates are adaptive. In particular, evolution has resulted in an increasing degree of dissociation of the physical properties of sensory inputs from their behavioral salience to the individual. Adaptation of the control circuits also enhances the repertoire of voluntary motor actions available to a species by allowing individuals to remember and learn from prior experience, to predict the future outcomes of different action choices, and to adopt new strategies and find new solutions to attain their desired goals. Volitional self-control over how, when, and even whether to act endows primate voluntary behavior with much of its richness and flexibility and prevents behavior from becoming impulsive, compulsive, or even harmful. Voluntary behavior is the physical manifestation of an individual's intention to act on the environment, usually to achieve a goal immediately or at some point

in the future. This may require single nonstereotypical

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 816

## The neural processes by which individuals acquire information about their environment and the relation -

ship of their body to it, decide how to interact with the

environment to achieve short- or long-term goals, and organize and execute the voluntary movement(s) that will fulfill their goals are traditionally partitioned into three analytic components: Perceptual mechanisms generate an internal representation of the external world and the individual within it, cognitive processes use this internal model of the world to select a course of action to interact with its environment, and the chosen plan of action is then relayed to the motor systems for implementation. This serial view of the brain's overall functional organization has long dominated neuroscience; this textbook, for example, has separate sections dedicated to perception, cognition, and movement. The brain must transform a goal into motor commands that realize the goal. For example, taking a sip of coffee requires the brain to convert visual informa-

tion about the coffee cup and somatic information about the current posture and motion of your arm and hand into a pattern of muscle contractions that moves your hand to the cup, grasps it, and then lifts it to your mouth. Many behavioral and modeling studies suggest that this could be accomplished by a series of transformations of sensorimotor coordinates that con -vert the retinal image of the cup into motor commands (Figure 34–1A). Variants of this sensorimotor transformation model have guided the design and interpretation of many studies on the control of voluntary arm move-

ments. Neural recording studies, including many that will be described here, have found possible neural correlates of the motor parameters and sensorimotor transformations presumed to underlie movement

18/01/21 6:08 PM

A

Extrinsic

coordinates Extrinsic kinematics

processing during voluntary motor actions.

A. The concept of sensorimotor transformations addresses Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices Intrinsic Kinetics/

kinematics muscle

generating the patterns of neural activity that specify the causal

B. Optimal feedback control recognizes three key processes

the basic problem that tasks such as reaching to a visual target require the brain and spinal cord to convert sensory informa-

<!-- image -->

tion about the spatial location of the target, initially represented in retinal coordinates, into patterns of muscle activity to move the limb to the target object. It is assumed that this sensorimotor transformation involves the use of intermediary representations—representation of the location of the target object relative to the body, the spatiotemporal trajectory of the hand (extrinsic kinematics), and motion of the joints (intrinsic kinematics) necessary to reach and grasp the object—before planning and execution. This conceptual framework

is an example of a representational model of brain func-

tion. Just as the activity of neurons in primary sensory

areas appears to encode specific physical properties of stimuli, the sensorimotor transformation model assumes that the activity of neurons in the motor system explicitly encodes or represents specific properties and parameters of the intended movement. However, the sensorimotor transformation model has important limitations. Among them, the parameters and coordinate systems typically used in such

models were imported from physics and engineering, rather than derived from the physiological properties of biological sensors and effectors. Furthermore, the model places all emphasis on strictly serial feedforward computations and relegates feedback circuits

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 817

for control. Optimal state and goal estimation (red box) integrates sensory feedback from various modalities along with

an efference copy of motor commands to estimate the present position and motion of the body and objects in the world. Task selection (blue box) involves processes that identify behavioral goals based on internal desires and information about the state of the body and the world. Control policy (green box) determines the feedback gains, operations, and processes necessary to generate motor commands to control movement. primarily to the detection and correction of perfor-

mance errors after they are committed. The model also

requires that every temporal detail of a movement be

explicitly calculated before the motor system can generate any motor commands. Another limitation is its rigidity; it assumes that the same sequence of computations controls every movement in every context. Finally, this approach has not addressed how the proposed sensorimotor transformations could be implemented by neurons. In recent years, theoretical studies of the motor system have been moving away from strictly representational models to more dynamical causal models. This

approach begins with the premise that the functional architecture of motor control circuits evolved to generate movements, not to represent their parameters.

18/01/21 6:08 PM



Part V / Movement

These circuit properties were acquired by evolutionary

changes in neural circuitry and by experience-dependent

adaptive processes during postnatal development that

produce the patterns of synaptic connectivity within the neural circuits that are necessary to generate the desired movements. Spinal and supraspinal motor circuits ensure that spinal motor neurons generate the appropriate muscle contraction signals across task conditions without relying on computational formalisms such as coordinate transformations. One such theoretical framework is optimal feedback control (Figure 34–1B; and see Chapter 30). There are many different forms of optimal control, and each

captures important aspects of control. Optimal feedback control, as the name implies, emphasizes the importance of feedback signals for the planning and control of movements. It is optimal in the sense that it emphasizes the importance of the behavioral goal and the current context in determining how best to plan and control movements. This flexibility can explain how human motor performance can be both highly variable and yet successful. The optimal feedback control framework also divides the control of voluntary movements into three key processes: state estimation, task selection, and con-

trol policy (Figure 34–1B). State estimation involves forward internal models that use efference copies of motor commands and external sensory feedback to provide the best estimate of the present state of the body and the environment (Chapter 30). Task selection involves the neural processes by which the brain chooses a behavioral goal in the current context and what motor action(s) might best attain that goal. This selection can be based on the sensory evidence supporting alternative actions and alternate options to attain the goal, and on other factors that influence the optimal response such as motivational state, task urgency, preferences, relative benefits versus risks, the mechanical properties of the body and environment, and even the biomechanical costs of different action choices. Finally, the control policy provides the set of rules and computations that establish how to generate the motor commands to attain the behavioral goal given the present state of the body and the environment. Importantly, the control policy process in optimal feedback control is not a series of pure feedforward computations to calculate every instantaneous detail of a desired movement trajectory and associated muscle activity patterns before movement onset. Instead, it involves context- and time-dependent adjustments to feedback circuit gains that allow the spatiotemporal form of muscle activity to emerge dynamically in real time as part of the control process underlying movement generation.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 818

The sensorimotor transformation and optimal

feedback control models are not mutually incompati-

ble hypotheses. Optimal feedback control explains cer-

tain features of motor behavior but is largely agnostic as to the neural implementation for control. It assumes that motor circuits are dynamical systems that attain desired goals under varying task constraints. As a result, a given neuron may contribute to sensorimotor control in different task conditions, but its activity may not correspond to a specific movement parameter in a definable coordinate framework. In contrast, sensori -motor transformation models do not fully explain how real-time movement control is implemented by motor circuits, but emphasize the need to convert information from sensory signals to motor commands. Even if the neural control system is dynamical, the system it controls—the musculoskeletal plant—is a physical object that must obey the universal physical

laws of motion. Thus, neural activity should show correlations with those physical parameters and laws that will help to infer how those neurons are contributing to voluntary motor control, even if they are not attempting to encode those terms. Indeed, experimental tasks that dissociate different types of movement-related information have revealed important differences in how neural activity in different cortical motor regions correlates with different movement properties and different aspects of movement planning and execution. Finally, we can impose arbitrary volitional control on how we move. For example, we can choose to make an unobstructed reaching movement efficiently along a straight path to the target or whimsically along a complex curved path even though there is no obstacle to avoid and the movement is energetically costly. The experimental challenge is to reveal how the brain can implement this willful control with neurons and neural circuits. Many Frontal and Parietal Cortical Regions Are Involved in Voluntary Control

## Here we describe the regions of frontal and parietal cortex that convert sensory inputs into motor commands

to produce voluntary movement. We then examine the

neural circuits involved in the voluntary control of arm and hand movements that are prominent components of the motor repertory of primates. We focus on studies in the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta), as much of our knowledge of the cortical control of the arm and hand comes from this species and the neural circuity underlying human voluntary control appears to have a similar organization. Many other neural structures, including the prefrontal cortex, the basal ganglia, and

18/01/21 6:08 PM

cerebellum, also play critical roles in the global organi-

zation of goal-directed voluntary behavior (Chapters

37 and 38).

Several different nomenclatures have been used in partitioning the precentral, postcentral, and parietal cortex, based on regional differences in cytoarchitec-

tonic and myeloarchitectonic details, cortico-cortical connectivity, the distribution of different marker molecules, and regional differences in neural response properties. Here we will use some of the more widely accepted terminology without describing approximate homologies among the various nomenclatures. Based on the pioneering cytoarchitectonic studies of humans by Brodmann, the different lobes of the monkey's cerebral cortex were divided into smaller

regions, including two in precentral cortex (areas 4 and 6), four in the postcentral cortex (areas 1, 2, 3a, and 3b), and at least two in the superior and inferior parietal cortex (areas 5 and 7). While these cytoarchitectonic divisions persist in the literature, subsequent anatomical and functional studies have radically changed the view of how the precentral and parietal cortices are organized (Figure 34–2). Current maps usually place the primary motor cortex (M1), the cortical region most directly involved in motor execution in primates, in Brodmann's area 4. Brod-

mann's area 6 is now typically divided into five or six functional areas that are principally involved in different aspects of the planning and control of motor actions of different parts of the body. Arm-control regions include the dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) and predorsal premotor cortex (pre-PMd), in the caudal and rostral parts of the dorsal convexity of lateral area 6, respectively. Handcontrol regions include the ventral premotor cortex (PMv), found on the ventral convexity of area 6, which has been further divided into two or three smaller subregions. A variety of functions related to motor selection, sequencing, and initiation have been found in medial premotor cortical regions. These include a region on the medial surface of the cortical hemisphere that was originally called the secondary motor cortex by Woolsey and colleagues, who discovered it, but is now called the supplementary motor area. This region is in turn split into two regions, a supplementary motor area proper (SMA) in the caudal part and a presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA) in the rostral part. Outside of Brodmann's area 6, three additional motor areas, the dorsal, ventral, and rostral cingulate motor areas (CMAd, CMAv, and CMAr, respectively), are also involved in motor selection but have not been as well studied as more lateral premotor areas. The primary somatosensory cortex (S-I; including areas 1, 2, 3a, and 3b) is located in the anterior

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 819

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


postcentral gyrus. It processes cutaneous and mus-

cle mechanoreceptor signals from the periphery and

transmits that information to other parietal and pre-

central cortical regions (Chapter 19). Like area 6, Brodmann's parietal areas 5 and 7 are now divided into several regions within and adjacent to the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), each of which integrates various types of sensory information about the body or spatial goals for voluntary motor control. These include parietal lobe areas PE and PEc on the rostral or superior bank, and PF, PFG, PG, and OPT on the caudal, inferior bank. Areas inside the IPS include the anterior, lateral, medial, and ventral intraparietal areas (AIP, LIP, MIP, and VIP, respectively) as well as intraparietal area PEip and higher visual area V6A. These precentral, postcentral, and parietal cortical regions are interconnected by complex patterns of reciprocal, convergent, and divergent projections. The

SMA, PMd, and PMv have somatotopically organized reciprocal connections not only with M1 but also with each other. Both the SMA and M1 receive somatotopically organized input from S-I and the dorsorostral parietal cortex, whereas PMd and PMv are reciprocally connected with progressively more caudal, medial, and lateral parts of the parietal cortex. These somatosensory and parietal inputs provide the primary motor and caudal premotor regions with sensory information related to behavioral goals, target objects, and the position and motion of the body that is used to plan and guide motor acts. In contrast, pre-SMA and pre-PMd project to SMA and PMd but do not project to M1 and are only weakly connected with the parietal lobe. They

instead have reciprocal connections with prefrontal cortex and so may impose more arbitrary contextdependent control over voluntary behavior. Prefrontal cortex is also connected with other premotor cortical regions. The control of hand and arm motor actions is implemented by partially segregated parallel circuits distributed across several parietal and precentral

motor areas. Hand motor function is generally supported by frontoparietal circuits that are located more laterally, notably AIP and PMv. In contrast, proximal arm motor function is supported by circuits that are more medial, notably parietal areas PE and MIP and precentral areas PMd, SMA, and pre-SMA. Descending Motor Commands Are Principally Transmitted by the Corticospinal Tract

## Older textbooks often referred to the primary motor cortex (M1) as the "final common path." Other

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

A Human

Supplementary

<!-- image -->

sulcus is opened in the bottom panel. The parietal areas are des- V6A

parietal and frontal motor areas. (Abbreviations: CMAr, rostral

ignated in Constantin von Economo's terminology by the letter P (parietal), followed by letters instead of numbers to indicate the cytoarchitectonically different areas. Areas PF and PFG roughly correspond to Brodmann's area 7b, and areas PG and OPT to Brodmann's area 7a. Areas inside the intraparietal sulcus include the anterior, lateral, medial, and ventral intraparietal areas (AIP LIP , MIP , VIP, respectively), as well as the PE intraparietal area cortical motor areas were thought to influence vol-

, cingulate motor area; CMAv, ventral cingulate motor area; CMd, dorsal cingulate motor area; F, frontal; M1, primary motor cortex; OPT, occipito-parieto-temporal; P, parietal; PE , PF, and PFG are parietal areas according to the nomenclature of von Economo; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; Pre-PMd, predorsal premotor cortex; S-I, primary somatosensory cortex; SMA, supplemental motor area.) Several cortical motor regions outside of M1

untary movements via their projections to M1, which project to subcortical areas of the brain as well as to

then formulated the descending motor command that

was transmitted to the spinal cord. This is not correct.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 820

the spinal cord in parallel with the descending pro-

jections from M1. The key descending pathway for

18/01/21 6:08 PM

B Macaque monkey

Areas on the cortical convexity
Part V / Movement

A Human

Supplementary

<!-- image -->

sulcus is opened in the bottom panel. The parietal areas are des- V6A

parietal and frontal motor areas. (Abbreviations: CMAr, rostral

ignated in Constantin von Economo's terminology by the letter P (parietal), followed by letters instead of numbers to indicate the cytoarchitectonically different areas. Areas PF and PFG roughly correspond to Brodmann's area 7b, and areas PG and OPT to Brodmann's area 7a. Areas inside the intraparietal sulcus include the anterior, lateral, medial, and ventral intraparietal areas (AIP LIP , MIP , VIP, respectively), as well as the PE intraparietal area cortical motor areas were thought to influence vol-

, cingulate motor area; CMAv, ventral cingulate motor area; CMd, dorsal cingulate motor area; F, frontal; M1, primary motor cortex; OPT, occipito-parieto-temporal; P, parietal; PE , PF, and PFG are parietal areas according to the nomenclature of von Economo; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; Pre-PMd, predorsal premotor cortex; S-I, primary somatosensory cortex; SMA, supplemental motor area.) Several cortical motor regions outside of M1

untary movements via their projections to M1, which project to subcortical areas of the brain as well as to

then formulated the descending motor command that

was transmitted to the spinal cord. This is not correct.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 820

the spinal cord in parallel with the descending pro-

jections from M1. The key descending pathway for

18/01/21 6:08 PM

B Macaque monkey

Areas on the cortical convexity voluntary control is the pyramidal tract, which originates in cortical layer V in a number of precentral and parietal areas. The pyramidal tract contains axons that termi- nate in brain stem motor structures (the corticobulbar tract) and axons that project down to the spinal cord (corticospinal tract). Precentral areas include not only M1 but also SMA, PMd, PMv, and the cingulate motor areas (Figure 34–3). Descending fibers from S-I and parietal areas, including PE and PFG, also travel in the pyramidal tract. The pre-SMA and pre-PMd do not send axons directly to the spinal cord; instead, their descending outputs reach the spinal cord indirectly through projections to other subcortical structures. Most corticospinal tract axons originating in one hemisphere cross to the other side of the midline (decussate) at the pyramid in the caudal medulla, and from there project to the spinal cord itself, forming the lateral corticospinal tract. A small portion does not decussate and forms the ventral corticospinal tract. Many corticospinal axons in primates, and virtually all corticospinal axons in other mammals, terminate only on spinal interneurons and exert their influence on voluntary movement indirectly through spinal interneuronal and reflex pathways. In monkeys, all corticospinal axons from premotor cortical areas and many from M1 terminate on interneurons in the spinal intermediate zone, whereas postcentral and parietal areas target interneurons in the dorsal horn. The terminal endings of a sizeable portion of the corticospinal axons arising from M1 in primates, but not other mammals, arborize at their targets and synapse directly on spinal alpha motor neurons that in turn innervate muscles; these M1 neurons with direct monosynaptic projections to spinal motor neurons are called corticomotoneuronal cells . Any voluntary arm movement can have destabilizing effects on the rest of the body due to mechanical interactions between body segments. Thus, control of Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


single-cell recording in the cerebral cortex of awake

animals, tasks that experimentally manipulate differ-

ent attributes of movements have been used to study

every cortical area involved in the control of arm and hand movements to try to identify neural correlates of the presumed control processes in each area. In "reaction-time" tasks, animals make a prespecified response when they detect a particular stimulus, such as reaching to a target when it appears (Figure 34–4A).

The stimulus informs the animal both what movement to make and when to make it. However, reaction times in such tasks are typically short, often less than 300 ms, and most or all putative planning stages leading up to the initiation of the movement are accomplished within that brief time. This makes it very difficult to discern what kinds of information are represented in the activity of the neurons at each given moment and thus to what processes they are contributing (Figure 34–4B). However, a critical feature of voluntary behavior is that movement initiation is not obligatory the instant an intention to act is formed. This volitional control

over the timing of movement has been exploited by socalled "instructed-delay" motor tasks (Figure 34–4A), in which an instructional cue informs the animal about specific aspects of an impending movement such as the location of a target, but the animal must withhold the response until a delayed stimulus signals when to make the movement. This protocol allows researchers to dissociate in time the neural processes associated with the early stages of planning the intended act from those that are directly coupled in real time to the initiation and control of the movement. As expected, neurons in all the movement-related cortical areas discharge prior to and during movement execution in reaction-time tasks (Figure 34–4B),

voluntary arm movements requires coordination with neural circuits responsible for the control of posture and balance. This is mediated by descending projections from cortical motor areas to the reticular forma tion, which in turn project to the spinal cord via the reticulospinal tract (Chapters 33 and 36). Imposing a Delay Period Before the Onset of Movement Isolates the Neural Activity Associated

With Planning From That Associated With

## Executing the Action Voluntary movement requires the intervention of a number of neural processes between the arrival of salient sensory inputs and the initiation of an appropriate

motor response. With the development in the 1960s of

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 821

-and their activity correlates systematically with different properties of movements, such as their direction, velocity, spatial trajectory, and causal forces and muscle activity. Critically, however, many neurons in the same areas also signal information about an intended motor act during an instructed-delay period long before its initiation (Figure 34–4B). Thus, even though planning and execution are distinct serial stages in voluntary motor control, they are not implemented by distinct neural populations in different cortical areas. Moreover, even a well-trained monkey will occasionally make the wrong movement in response to an instructional cue. In those trials, the activity during the delay period generally predicts the erroneous motor response that the monkey will eventually make. This is compelling evidence that the activity is a neural correlate of the monkey's motor intentions, not a passive sensory response to the instructional cues.

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

A

CMAr

Figure 34–3 Cortical origins of the corticospinal SMA

CMAd

<!-- image -->

tract. (Reproduced, with permission, from Dum and Strick

2002. Copyright © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.)

A. Corticospinal neurons that modulate muscle activity in the contralateral arm and hand originate in the parts of the primary

motor cortex (M1) motor map and many subdivisions of the

premotor cortex (PMd , PMv , SMA) that are related to arm and hand movements (indicated by the darker zones). The axons from these areas project into the spinal cord cervical enlargement (see part B). Corticospinal fibers projecting to the leg, trunk, and other somatotopic parts of the brain stem and spinal motor system originate in the other parts of the motor and premotor cortex, indicated by the lighter zones. (Abbreviations: CMAd, dorsal cingulate motor area; CMAr, rostral cingulate motor area; CMAv, ventral cingulate motor area; M1, primary motor cortex; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.)

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 822

B. Transverse sections of the spinal cord at the level of the cer-

vical enlargement in monkeys after injection of the anterograde

tracer horseradish peroxidase into different arm-related cortical

motor regions to label the distribution of corticospinal axons arising from each cortical region. The corticospinal axons from the primary motor cortex (left), supplementary motor area (middle), and cingulate motor areas (right) all terminate on interneuronal networks in the intermediate laminae (V–VIII) of the spinal cord. Only the primary motor cortex contains corticospinal neurons (corticomotoneuronal cells) whose axons terminate directly on spinal motor neurons in the most ventral and lateral part of the spinal ventral horn (Rexed's lamina IX). Rexed's laminae I to IX of the dorsal and ventral horns are shown in faint outline in each section. The dense cluster of labeled axons adjacent to the dorsal horn (upper left) in each section are corticospinal axons descending in the dorsolateral funiculus, before entering the spinal intermediate and ventral laminae.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

A

Reaction-time task Target and

<!-- image -->

duced, with permission, from Crammond and Kalaska 2000.)

Reaction-time trials Instructed-delay trials

Target and go Target

500 ms

row represents activity in a single trial. The thin tics in each

A. In a reaction-time task, a sensory cue instructs the subject both where to move (target cue) and when to move (go cue). All neural operations required to plan and initiate the execution of the move-

ment are performed in the brief time between the appearance of the cue and the onset of movement. In an instructed-delay task, an initial cue tells the subject where to move, and only later is the go cue given. The knowledge provided by the first cue permits the subject to plan the upcoming movement. Any changes in activity that occur after the first cue but before the second are presumed to be neural correlates of the planning stage. B. Movement planning and execution are not completely segregated at the level of single neurons or neural populations in a given cortical area. Raster plots and cumulative histograms

show the responses of three premotor cortex neurons to Parietal Cortex Provides Information About k, raster row represent action potentials, and the two thicker tics show the onset and end of movement. In reaction-time trials, the monkey does not know in which direction to move until the target appears. In contrast, in instructed-delay trials, an initial cue informs the monkey where the target lies well in advance of the appearance of a second signal to initiate the movement. During the delay period, activity in many premotor cells shows directionally tuned changes that signal the direction of the impending delayed movement. The activity in cell 1 appears to be strictly related to the planning phase of the task, for there is no execution-related activity after the go signal in the instructed-delay task. The other two cells show different degrees of activity related to both planning and execution. In addition, information about the current posture and

the World and the Body for State Estimation to motion of the arm and hand is provided by integrating

Plan and Execute Motor Actions

## Sensory information is essential for selecting appropriate and effective actions. Before drinking from a cup, the

brain uses visual input to identify which object is the cup,

where it is located relative to the body, and its physical properties such as size, shape, and handle orientation.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 823

proprioceptive signals from the limb with efference cop-

ies of motor commands (Chapter 30). Finally, cutaneous signals are critical when interacting manually with objects, such as grasping and lifting the cup. Several lines of evidence implicate the parietal cortex as a key brain region in sensory processing for motor action. The parietal lobe, especially PE, PEip, and MIP,

18/01/21 6:08 PM

Go

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices

B



Part V / Movement

receives strong somatic sensory inputs about body pos-

ture and movement from S-I. Several parietal regions

along and within the IPS are major components of the

dorsal visual pathway, which processes visuospatial information about objects that guides arm and hand movements while reaching to, grasping, and manipulating them. The parietal lobe is also reciprocally interconnected with precentral cortical motor areas to provide the precentral cortex with signals for the sensory guidance of movement and to receive efference copies of motor commands from those same precentral areas. Finally, human subjects with lesions of the posterior parietal cortex often demonstrate specific impairments in using sensory information to guide motor action (Box 34–1). The Parietal Cortex Links Sensory Information to Motor Actions

## We experience the space that surrounds us as a single unified environment within which objects have specific locations relative to each other and to ourselves.

Classical neurology suggested that the parietal lobe constructed a unified multimodal neural representation of the world by integration of inputs from different sensory modalities. This single map of space was assumed to provide all the information necessary both for spatial perception and for the sensory guidance of movement, and so was shared by the different motor circuits that controlled different parts of the body, such as the eyes, arm, and hand.

However, the idea that the parietal cortex contains

a single topographically organized representation of space is incorrect. Instead, the posterior parietal cortex

contains several distinct functional areas that work in parallel and receive different combinations of sensory and motor inputs related to the guidance of movement of different effectors, such as the eyes, arm, and hand. Neurons in these areas are often multimodal, with both visual and somatic sensory receptive fields, and also discharge preferentially prior to and during movements of a specific effector. Each functional area is connected to frontal motor regions involved in control of the same effectors. Finally, each region is not topographically organized in the familiar sense of a faithful point-to-point representation of surrounding space, but rather comprises a complex mixture of neurons with different sensory inputs that may contribute to the multisensory integration required to guide motor actions with the environment. Body Position and Motion Are Represented in Several Areas of Posterior Parietal Cortex

## The S-I and adjacent superior parietal cortex regions PE, MIP, and PEip are a major source of propriocep-

tive and tactile sensory information about the position

and motion of body parts. Neurons in S-I areas 1 and 2

Box 34–1 Lesion Studies of Posterior Parietal Cortex Lead to Deficits in the Use of Sensory

Information to Guide Action

## Naturally occurring or experimentally induced lesions have long been used to infer the roles of different neural lesions of certain parts of the parietal lobe suffer specific deficits in the ability to direct their arm and hand accu-

structures. However, the effects of lesions must always

be interpreted with caution. It is often incorrect to conclude that the function perturbed by an insult to a part of the motor system resides uniquely in the damaged structure or that the injured neurons explicitly perform that function. Furthermore, the adverse effects of lesions can be masked or altered by compensatory mechanisms in remaining, intact structures. Nevertheless, lesion experiments have been fundamental in differentiating the functional roles of brain regions. Behavioral studies by Goodale, Milner, Rossetti, and others on patients with parietal cortical damage have led to the conclusion that a primary function of the parietal

lobe is to extract sensory information about the external world and one's own body for the planning and guidance of movements. Such studies have shown that patients with

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 824

rately to the spatial location of objects and to shape the ori-

entation and grip aperture of the hand prior to grasping it. They have also shown a particularly severe deficit in the ability to make rapid adjustments to their ongoing reach and grasping actions in response to unexpected

changes in the location or orientation of the target object. This visual guidance of action is provided by visual signals that are routed through the dorsal visual stream and may operate in parallel with and independently of perceptual processes evoked by the visual inputs that are routed simultaneously through the ventral visual stream in the temporal lobe. For instance, whereas our visual perception of the size and orientation of objects can be deceived by certain perceptual illusions, the motor system often behaves as if it is not fooled and makes accurate movements.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

typically respond to tactile input from a limited part of

the contralateral body or to movements of one or a few

adjacent joints in specific directions.

In contrast, many PE and MIP neurons discharge during passive and active movements of multiple joints. Some cells also respond during combined

movements of multiple body parts, including bilateral movements of both arms. Many PE and MIP neurons also have large tactile receptive fields whose responses are modulated by context during limb movement or posture. For instance, a neuron with a tactile receptive field that covers the entire glabrous (palmar) surface of the hand may only respond to physical contact with an object when the hand is close to the body and not when it touches the object with the arm fully extended. These findings indicate that while area 1 and 2 neurons encode the positions and movements of specific body parts, superior parietal neurons integrate infor-

mation on the positions of individual joints as well as the positions of limb segments with respect to the body. This integration creates a neural "body schema" that provides information on where the arm is located with respect to the body and how different arm segments are positioned and moving with respect to one another. This body schema is critical for selecting how to attain behavioral goals and for ongoing control of movement. For instance, a key requirement for efficient reaching is knowledge of where the arm is before and during the reach. Monkeys with experimental lesions in

Brodmann's area 2 and the adjacent superior parietal lobule (area 5 or PE) show deficits in reaching to and manipulating objects under proprioceptive and tactile guidance without vision. Human patients with similar lesions show the same deficit, without the spatial neglect that is a common consequence of more lateral lesions in the inferior parietal lobe. Spatial Goals Are Represented in Several Areas of Posterior Parietal Cortex Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


at it, and they often discharge prior to a saccade that

is directed toward a visual stimulus in their receptive

field (Figure 34–5A; and see Chapter 35).

Several parietal regions are preferentially implicated in the control of arm and hand movements. For instance, the most medial regions of the superior

parietal cortex, areas V6A and PEc, receive input from extrastriate visual areas V2 and V3. Many V6A and PEc neurons have visual receptive fields in retinal coordinates, but their activity is also frequently modulated by the direction of gaze, the current arm posture, and the direction of reaching movements. The ventral intraparietal area (VIP) in the fundus of the IPS receives inputs from two components of the dorsal visual stream, the medial temporal cortex and

medial superior temporal cortex, which are involved in the analysis of optic flow and visual motion. Many VIP neurons respond to visual stimuli and somatosensory stimuli with receptive fields on the face or head and, in some cases, on the arm or trunk. Neural activity is in head-centered coordinates, as somatosensory and visual information remains in register even if the eyes move to fixate different spatial locations (Figure 34–5B). Some VIP neurons respond to both visual and tactile stimuli moving in the same direction, whereas others are strongly activated by visual stimuli that move toward their tactile receptive field but only if the path of motion will eventually intersect the tactile receptive field. These neurons may allow the monkeys to link the location and motion of objects in their immediate peripersonal space with different parts of their body. Another area of parietal cortex related to reaching is the parietal reach region (PRR). The PRR likely corresponds to the medial intraparietal cortex (MIP) and

## Functional areas within the IPS are strongly implicated in the processing of spatial, especially visual, informa-

tion relevant to action. Each of these areas has unique

ways of representing objects and spatial goals relative to the body and contributes to controlling motor actions of different parts of the body. For instance, many neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) receive visual input from extrastriate cortical areas. Their receptive fields are fixed in retinal coordinates and shift to new spatial locations whenever the monkey changes its direction of gaze. Neural responses also often increase when the animal attends to a stim ulus within the receptive field even without looking

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 825

-adjacent arm-control parts of the superior and inferior parietal cortex. The activity of many PRR neurons varies with the location of reach targets relative to the hand. However, this signal is not fixed to the current location of the hand or target but rather on the current direction of gaze (Figure 34–5C). Each time the monkey looks in a different direction, the reach-related activity of PRR neurons changes, even if the location of the target and hand and the required reach trajectory do not change. In contrast, the reach-related activity of many neurons in areas PE and PEip is less related to gaze and more strongly related to the current hand position and arm posture. PE and PEip neurons thus provide a more stable signal about the location of the reach target relative to the current position of the hand compared to PRR. Finally, neurons in the anterior intraparietal area (AIP) are primarily implicated in object grasping and manipulation by movements of the hand. Many AIP

neurons are preferentially active while reaching for

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement VIP MIP

LIP

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 826

Receptive eld

characteristics

Retina-centered,

attention sensitive

Head-centered

Retina-centered

direction of reach;

preparation to

Retina-centered,

object-specic

viewing, grasping

18/01/21 6:08 PM

and grasping objects of particular shapes, sizes, and

spatial orientations, and often even while viewing

those objects before grasping them (Figure 34–5D).

There is a broad range of neural response properties, from neurons that respond almost exclusively to visual input about the objects but not to the grasping actions to neurons that discharge only during the hand movements themselves even in the dark. This suggests that the AIP contains neural circuits that begin to transform visual information about the physical properties of an object that are relevant to how it could be handled— what James Gibson has called the object's affordances— into appropriate hand actions (Chapter 56). A fascinating discovery about the parietal cortex is that the receptive fields of neurons can be altered by individual experience, such as tool use. Monkeys were

trained to retrieve food pellets that were out of normal reach of the arm and hand by using a rake-shaped tool. Many VIP neurons normally respond to visual objects when they are either located near the current position of the hand or anywhere within reach with the arm. After training, their visual receptive fields transiently expand to incorporate the tool when the monkey grasps it, as if the distal end of the tool had become a functional extension of the monkey's own hand and arm (Figure 34–6). Internally Generated Feedback May Influence Parietal Cortex Activity

## The delays involved in the transmission of visual and somatic feedback about arm movements from the

periphery to cortical circuits can lead to oscillations

Figure 34–5 (Opposite) Neurons in the parietal cortex of

the monkey are selective for the location of objects in the

visual field relative to particular parts of the body. Each his-

togram represents the firing rate of a representative neuron as a function of time following presentation of a stimulus. In each diagram, the line emanating from the eyes indicates where the monkey is looking. A. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area have retina-centered receptive fields. The strength of the visual response depends on whether the monkey is paying attention to the stimulus (S).

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


or even instabilities in real-time sensorimotor control.

One theoretical solution to this problem is to use a for-

ward internal model to make predictive estimates of

body motion based on internal efference copies of outgoing motor commands as well as from slower peripheral feedback signals (Chapter 30). Several lines of evidence suggest that parietal cortex circuits, along with the cerebellum (Chapter 37), may implement a similar solution. Many reach-related

neurons in PE, MIP, and PRR are active not only in response to passive sensory inputs but also before the onset of movement and during the instructed-delay period of delayed-reaching tasks. These responses suggest that these neurons process centrally generated signals about motor intentions prior to movement onset. This premovement activity is often interpreted as evidence that the parietal cortex generates feedforward signals that contribute to the early planning of movements. However, an alternate interpretation is that the premovement activity is driven by an efference copy of the motor command for the intended movement that is transmitted into the parietal cortex via its reciprocal connections with precentral motor areas. This combination of peripheral sensory inputs and central efference copies could permit some parietal reach-related circuits to compute a continuously updated estimate of the current state of the arm and its position relative to the behavioral goal. This estimate could be used to make rapid corrections for errors in ongoing arm movements. Whether the parietal circuits are primarily involved in the formation of a subject's motor intentions or in

contrast is between situations 1 and 4. The retinal location of

the light is the same in both (slightly to the right of the fixation

point), yet the neuron fires in 1, when the stimulus is to the

right of the head, but not in 4, when the stimulus is to the left of the head. C. In the medial intraparietal area, neurons are selective for the retina-centered direction of the reach (R) and fire when the monkey is preparing to reach for a visual target. This neu-

4). ron fires when the monkey reaches for a target to the right of where he is looking (2 , 3). It does not fire when he reaches for a target at which he is looking (1) or when he moves only his eyes to the target at the right (4). The physical direction of the reach is not a factor in the neuron's firing: It is the same in 1 and 3, and yet, the neuron fires only in 3. D. In the anterior intraparietal area, neurons are selective for objects of particular shapes and fire when the monkey is looking at or preparing to grasp (G) an object. This neuron fires

The neuron fires when a light is flashed inside its receptive field (dotted circle) (1). The response is more robust if the monkey is instructed to attend to the location of the stimulus (2). The neuron does not fire if the stimulus is presented outside the receptive field, regardless of where attention is directed (3 , B. In the ventral intraparietal area, some neurons have headcentered receptive fields. This is determined by keeping the head in a fixed position while the monkey is instructed to shift

its gaze to various locations. This neuron fires when a light appears to the right of the midline of the head (1 , 2). It does not fire when the light appears at another location relative to the head, such as the midline or to the left. (3 , 4). The critical

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 827

when the monkey is viewing a ring (3) or making a memoryguided reach to it in the dark (2). It fires especially strongly when the monkey is grasping the ring under visual guidance (1). It does not fire during viewing or grasping of other objects (4).

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

Somatosensory

receptive eld

A

<!-- image -->

once a tool is grasped. (Adapted from Maravita and Iriki, 2004.

Copyright © 2003 Published by Elsevier Ltd.) A. The orange area on the hand (left) indicates the somatosensory receptive field for a neuron. The purple area (middle) indicates the neuron's visual receptive field (vRF) region around

the hand. The vRF is anchored to the hand and changes spatial location whenever the monkey moves its arm. The vRF expands

state estimation will depend on the origin of its pre-

movement activity. If it is mainly generated within the

parietal cortex itself, this will strongly implicate the

parietal cortex in the planning of intended movements. In contrast, if it is primarily driven by an efference copy relayed from precentral motor areas, this would strongly implicate the parietal circuits in state estimation, including predicting how the arm should move in response to the motor command. Premotor Cortex Supports Motor Selection

and Planning

## As outlined at the beginning of this chapter, a decision to act in a particular way in a given situation is shaped

by many factors, including sensory information about

objects, events, and opportunities for action from the

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 828

Visual receptive eld before tool use Visual receptive eld after tool use when the monkey grasps a rake after it has learned how to use B. A single neuron that has a shoulder-centered bimodal somatosensory (orange) and visual (purple) receptive field is illustrated. The vRF for this neuron (middle) is larger than the one shown in part A, possibly reflecting the potential workspace related to whole-arm function. The vRF also expands to incorporate the extended workspace permitted by use of a rake (right).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

environment, body position and motion, internal moti-

vational states, prior experiences, reward preferences,

and learned arbitrary rules and strategies linking

sensory inputs to motor actions. There can be many reasons why you want to drink some coffee, and that desire can be fulfilled by actions ranging from simply reaching out to your full coffee cup to making coffee at home or going to a café. Frontal premotor cortical regions just rostral to M1 play an important role in early movement planning or task-selection processes. Many neurons in those areas,

such as the PMd neurons shown in Figure 34–4, generate activity during instructed-delay tasks that reflect the motor intentions of the monkey and even the factors that influenced those action choices. The different premotor cortical regions are presumed to make different but overlapping contributions to motor selection and planning. For instance, the lateral premotor

18/01/21 6:08 PM

cortex, including PMd and PMv, have traditionally

been implicated in actions initiated and guided by

external sensory inputs. In contrast, medial premotor

areas, including SMA, pre-SMA, and CMA, have been implicated in the control of self-initiated movements as well as the suppression of actions. However, the distinction between their respective contributions is not absolute. Medial Premotor Cortex Is Involved in the Contextual Control of Voluntary Actions

## Clinton Woolsey's pioneering electrical stimulation studies showed that, in addition to the motor map in M1, the medial wall of the frontal cortex contains an

array of neurons that also regulate body movements. This medial motor map, now called the supplementary motor area (SMA), includes the entire contralateral body but is coarser than the detailed map in M1, as described later. Strong stimulus currents are required to evoke movements, which are often complex actions such as postural adjustments or stepping Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


and climbing and can involve both sides of the body.

Today, there is agreement that this region contains

two areas that have distinct cytoarchitectonic charac-

teristics, axonal connections, and functional properties: a more caudal SMA proper and a more rostral presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA), which we will collectively call the supplementary motor cortex (SMC). The SMC has been implicated in many aspects of voluntary behavior, although its contribution remains controversial. Several lines of evidence support a role

in self-initiated behavior. In humans, electrical stimula -tion of SMC below the threshold for movement initia -tion can evoke an introspective sense of an urge to move that does not arise during M1 stimulation. Lesions of SMC produce problems initiating desired movements or suppressing undesirable movements (Box 34–2). Moreover, recordings of slow cortical potentials at the surface of the skull during the execution of self-paced movements show that the initial potential arises in the frontal cortex as much as 0.8 to 1.0 second before the onset of movement. This signal, named the readiness

Box 34–2 Lesions of Premotor Cortex Lead to Impairments in the Selection, Initiation, and

Suppression of Voluntary Behavior

## Lesions of the supplementary motor area (SMA) and presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA) and the prepatient is not hungry or when the food is clearly part of someone else's meal.

frontal areas connected with them produce deficits in

the initiation and suppression of movements. Initiation deficits manifest themselves as loss of self-initiated arm movements, even though the patient can move when adequately prompted. This deficit can involve movement of parts of the body (akinesia) contralateral to the region and speech (mutism). Deficits in movement suppression, in contrast, include the inability to suppress behaviors that are socially inappropriate. These include compulsive grasping

of an object when the hand touches it (forced grasping), irrepressible reaching and searching movements aimed at an object that has been presented visually (groping movements), and impulsive arm and hand movements to grab nearby objects and even people without conscious awareness of the intention to do so (alien-hand or anarchic-hand syndrome). Another striking syndrome is utilization behavior in which a patient compulsively grabs and uses objects without consideration of need or the social context.

These deficits in the initiation and suppression

of actions may represent opposite facets of the same functional role for SMA and especially pre-SMA in the

conditional or context-dependent control of voluntary behavior. Lesions affecting premotor cortex also lead to impairments in the selection of motor actions. For example, when a normal monkey sees a tasty food treat behind

a small transparent barrier, it readily reaches around the barrier to grasp it. However, after a large premotor cortex lesion, the monkey may persistently try to reach directly toward the treat and so repeatedly strikes the barrier with its hand, rather than making a detour around the barrier. More focal lesions or inactivation of the ventral premotor cortex perturbs the ability to use visual information about an object to shape the hand appropriately for

, the object's size, shape, and orientation before grasping it. Focal lesions of the dorsal premotor cortex affect the ability to learn and recall arbitrary sensorimotor mappings or conditional stimulus–response associations, whereas supplementary motor cortex lesions impede the ability to learn and recall temporal sequences of movement.

Examples are picking up and putting on multiple pairs of glasses or reaching for and eating food when the

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 829

18/01/21 6:08 PM
cortex, including PMd and PMv, have traditionally

been implicated in actions initiated and guided by

external sensory inputs. In contrast, medial premotor

areas, including SMA, pre-SMA, and CMA, have been implicated in the control of self-initiated movements as well as the suppression of actions. However, the distinction between their respective contributions is not absolute. Medial Premotor Cortex Is Involved in the Contextual Control of Voluntary Actions

## Clinton Woolsey's pioneering electrical stimulation studies showed that, in addition to the motor map in M1, the medial wall of the frontal cortex contains an

array of neurons that also regulate body movements. This medial motor map, now called the supplementary motor area (SMA), includes the entire contralateral body but is coarser than the detailed map in M1, as described later. Strong stimulus currents are required to evoke movements, which are often complex actions such as postural adjustments or stepping Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


and climbing and can involve both sides of the body.

Today, there is agreement that this region contains

two areas that have distinct cytoarchitectonic charac-

teristics, axonal connections, and functional properties: a more caudal SMA proper and a more rostral presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA), which we will collectively call the supplementary motor cortex (SMC). The SMC has been implicated in many aspects of voluntary behavior, although its contribution remains controversial. Several lines of evidence support a role

in self-initiated behavior. In humans, electrical stimula -tion of SMC below the threshold for movement initia -tion can evoke an introspective sense of an urge to move that does not arise during M1 stimulation. Lesions of SMC produce problems initiating desired movements or suppressing undesirable movements (Box 34–2). Moreover, recordings of slow cortical potentials at the surface of the skull during the execution of self-paced movements show that the initial potential arises in the frontal cortex as much as 0.8 to 1.0 second before the onset of movement. This signal, named the readiness

Box 34–2 Lesions of Premotor Cortex Lead to Impairments in the Selection, Initiation, and

Suppression of Voluntary Behavior

## Lesions of the supplementary motor area (SMA) and presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA) and the prepatient is not hungry or when the food is clearly part of someone else's meal.

frontal areas connected with them produce deficits in

the initiation and suppression of movements. Initiation deficits manifest themselves as loss of self-initiated arm movements, even though the patient can move when adequately prompted. This deficit can involve movement of parts of the body (akinesia) contralateral to the region and speech (mutism). Deficits in movement suppression, in contrast, include the inability to suppress behaviors that are socially inappropriate. These include compulsive grasping

of an object when the hand touches it (forced grasping), irrepressible reaching and searching movements aimed at an object that has been presented visually (groping movements), and impulsive arm and hand movements to grab nearby objects and even people without conscious awareness of the intention to do so (alien-hand or anarchic-hand syndrome). Another striking syndrome is utilization behavior in which a patient compulsively grabs and uses objects without consideration of need or the social context.

These deficits in the initiation and suppression

of actions may represent opposite facets of the same functional role for SMA and especially pre-SMA in the

conditional or context-dependent control of voluntary behavior. Lesions affecting premotor cortex also lead to impairments in the selection of motor actions. For example, when a normal monkey sees a tasty food treat behind

a small transparent barrier, it readily reaches around the barrier to grasp it. However, after a large premotor cortex lesion, the monkey may persistently try to reach directly toward the treat and so repeatedly strikes the barrier with its hand, rather than making a detour around the barrier. More focal lesions or inactivation of the ventral premotor cortex perturbs the ability to use visual information about an object to shape the hand appropriately for

, the object's size, shape, and orientation before grasping it. Focal lesions of the dorsal premotor cortex affect the ability to learn and recall arbitrary sensorimotor mappings or conditional stimulus–response associations, whereas supplementary motor cortex lesions impede the ability to learn and recall temporal sequences of movement.

Examples are picking up and putting on multiple pairs of glasses or reaching for and eating food when the

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 829

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

potential, has its peak in the cortex centered in SMC.

Because it occurs well before movement, the readiness

potential has been widely interpreted as evidence that

neural activity in this region is involved in forming the intention to move, not just in executing movement. Neurons in both SMA and pre-SMA discharge before and during voluntary movements. Unlike M1 neurons, the activity of most SMA neurons is less

tightly coupled to particular actions of a body part and appears instead to be associated with more complex, coordinated motor acts of the hand, arm, head, or trunk. Compared to SMA neurons, pre-SMA neurons often begin to discharge much earlier in advance of movement onset and are less tightly coupled to the execution of movements. The SMC has been implicated in the so-called executive control of behavior, such as operations required to switch between different actions, plans,

A Push Turn Pull and strategies. For example, in monkeys, some SMC neurons discharge strongly when a subject is presented with a cue instructing it to change movement targets or to suppress a previously intended movement. The SMC may therefore contain a system that can override motor plans when they are no longer appropriate.

The SMC has also been implicated in the organi-

zation and execution of movement sequences. Some SMC neurons discharge before the start of a particu-

lar sequence of three movements but not before a different sequence of the same three movements (Figure 34–7). Other neurons discharge only when a particular movement occurs in a specific position in a sequence or when a particular pair of consecutive movements occurs regardless of their position in the sequence. In contrast, some other SMC neurons discharge only when the monkey makes the movement that occurs in a particular ordinal position of a sequence (eg, only the third) irrespective of its nature or how many movements remain to be executed in the sequence. These seemingly disparate functions may reflect a more general role of the SMC in contextual control of voluntary behavior. Contextual control involves selecting

Push Pull Turn and executing those actions deemed appropriate on the basis of different combinations of internal and external cues as well as withholding inappropriate actions in

<!-- image -->

Pull Push Turn

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

complex of monkeys encode a specific sequence of motor

acts.  (Adapted, with permission, from Tanji 2001. Copyright ©


Turn

2001 by Annual Reviews.) A. A neuron discharges selectively during the waiting period before the first movement of the memorized sequence pushturn-pull (left). When the sequence is push-pull-turn (right), the

<!-- image -->

cell remains relatively silent, even though the first movement in

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 830


both sequences is the same (push). Triangles at the top of each

B. Records of a neuron whose activity increases selectively

during the interval between completion of one motor act, a pull, and the initiation of another act, a push. The cell is not

active when a push is the first movement in the sequence or when pull is followed by turn.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

a specific environmental or social context. It also can

involve organizing the sequence of actions required to

achieve a particular goal. Contextual control likely also

involves contributions from other neural circuits such as regions of the prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia. The cingulate motor areas (CMA) may also contribute to the contextual control of behavior. CMA appears to be involved in selecting alternate actions follow-

ing motor errors or in response to changing reward contingencies. For example, monkeys were trained to push or turn a handle in response to a noninstructive trigger signal. Initially, the monkeys received a large reward if they made the same movement (pushing or turning the handle) in sequential trials. After several trials, the reward size began to decrease. If the monkeys then switched to the other movement, the reward size returned to maximum once that movement was repeated for several trials. The best strategy for the monkeys, therefore, was to switch between repetitions of either pushing or turning the handle as soon as they detected a reduction in reward size. In this task, some neurons in the rostral CMA responded during the interval between the reception of reward and the start of the next trial. On trials with a

reduced reward, task-related activity in these neurons did not change when the monkeys made the same movement in the next trial; their activity only changed when the monkeys switched to the other movement in the next trial. Importantly, those same neurons did not show the same response change when a visual cue instructed the monkeys to change movements in the next trial. This suggests that these rostral CMA neurons were preferentially involved in the voluntary decision to switch and move to the alternate goal based on action outcomes (reward size), but not by visual instructions to switch. Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning Sensory-Guided Movement of the Arm

## Some of the first neural evidence that the lateral premotor cortex, including PMd and PMv, plays a crucial role

in the selection and planning of sensory-guided motor

actions came from recording studies by Ed Evarts, Steven Wise, and colleagues in the 1980s. These studies showed that many premotor neurons emitted brief short-latency discharge bursts in response to instructional cues that signaled specific movements, or sustained activity during the instructed-delay period between the appearance of the instructional cue and a second cue that permitted the instructed movement (Figure 34–4). This activity reflects information about the intended act, including the spatial location of the target, the direction of arm movement, and other

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 831

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


movement attributes. Importantly, PMd delay-period

activity can reflect the intention to reach to a particular

location with either the contralateral or ipsilateral arm,

even though the biomechanical details of the two arm movements are very different. This suggests that PMd activity can signal the intention to generate a motor act independent of the effector used to generate the action, in an extrinsic spatial coordinate framework consistent with a prediction of the sensorimotor coordinate transformation model of motor planning. Imaging studies have likewise found evidence for an extrinsic spatial representation of finger-tapping sequences made with either hand in human premotor cortex. Selection of an appropriate action from among multiple alternatives is a critical aspect of voluntary control. Delay-period activity in PMd can reflect that

process. For example, in one experiment, recordings were made from PMd neurons in monkeys during a task in which the animals first received two colored spatial cues that identified two potential targets for reaching in opposite directions. After a memorized-delay period, a new centrally-located color cue informed the monkeys which of the spatial cues was the correct target. Following the first instruction, neural activity in PMd signaled both potential-reaching movements, but immediately after the second instruction, activity in PMd signaled only the monkeys' reaching choice (Figure 34–8A). This showed that PMd can prepare multiple potential motor actions prior to the final decision about which action to take. Sub -sequent studies suggest that this might be limited to no more than three to four simultaneous potential actions. Reach-related neurons in parietal area PRR also contribute to the preparation for two potential motor actions before the final action decision is made (Figure 34–8B), revealing how this process is distributed across multiple arm movement–related cortical neural populations. PMd neurons can also signal a deliberate decision not to move. Many PMd neurons generate directionally tuned activity during an instructed-delay

period when a colored visual cue at a target location instructs a monkey to reach to the target, but decrease their activity when a different colored cue at the same location instructs the monkey to refrain from reaching to it. This differential activity is an unequivocal signal, seconds before the action is executed, about the monkey's intention to reach in a particular direction or not to move in response to an instructional cue (Figure 34–9). Interestingly, many neurons in the parietal area PE/MIP studied in the same task continue to generate directionally tuned activity during the delay period even after the instructional cue to withhold

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

Figure 34–8 Activity of reach-related cortical neurons in

monkeys during a target selection task reflects potential

movements to different targets as well as the chosen

direction of reach.

A. The three-dimensional colored surface depicts the mean level of activity of a population of dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) neurons with respect to baseline in a task in which a

monkey must choose one of two color-coded reach targets in each trial. Cells are sorted along one axis (labeled "cells") based on their preferred movement direction (neurons located at the red and blue circles prefer movements at 45° and 215°, respectively). Diagrams beside the neural response profile display the stimuli presented to the monkey at different times during the trial. Red and blue cues provide information about potential actions; green cues guide the monkeys through different stages of each trial but provide no information about what reach to make. Shortly after the start of each trial, two potential reach targets (blue and red spatial cues) appear in opposite locations relative to the starting position of the arm (green circle) for 500 ms and then disappear. After a memorized delay period, the color of the starting circle changes to either red or blue (color cue), indicating to the monkey which is the correct target, in this case at 45°. After a further delay period, the go signal (green circles at all eight possible target locations) instructs the monkey to begin reaching to its chosen target. During the period of target uncertainty between the appearance of the two spatial cues and the central color cue, PMd neurons that prefer the two potential reach movements (red and blue circles) are simultaneously activated, whereas neurons that prefer other movements are inactive or suppressed, so that the entire PMd population encodes the two potential reach actions. As soon as the color cue appears to identify the correct target, the PMd neural activity changes rapidly to signal the reach movement chosen by the monkey. Had the color cue designated the target at 215°, the neurons preferring that target (blue circle) would increase their activity, and the neurons preferring the target at 45° (red circle) would decrease their activity (not shown). (Reproduced, with permission, from Cisek and Kalaska 2010. Copyright © 2010 by Annual Reviews.) B. In a second study of neural activity in the parietal reach region (PRR), the format of data is the same as in part A. In this study, the monkey is presented with a single spatial cue

that instructs it to prepare to reach either to the cue's location (PD) or in the opposite direction (OD). After a random memorized delay period, a color cue specifies whether the reach should be to the remembered location of the spatial cue (green; PD) or in the OD (blue). PRR neural activity is sorted according to the preferred movement direction of each neuron, as in part A. Population activity initially specifies the spatial cue location but then reflects both potential movement directions during the remainder of the memorized delay period. Shortly after the color cue appears, the activity quickly shifts to reflect the chosen reach direction, either the PD or OD. (Reproduced, with permission, from Klaes et al. 2011. Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.)

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 832

A

PMd

B

PRR

<!-- image -->

Time

Move

Time

18/01/21 6:08 PM

A Reaction-time task Target and go cue

Figure 34–9 Decisions about response choices are evident

key. (Reproduced, with permission, from Crammond and

Kalaska 2000.) A. In a reaction-time task (reaching), a cell exhibits gradually increasing tonic firing while waiting for the appearance of a target. When the target appears (go cue), the cell generates a

<!-- image -->

directionally tuned response. B. In an instructed-delay task, when a monkey is shown the target and instructed to move once the go cue appears, the cell generates a strong directionally tuned signal for the duration of

the delay period before the go cue (top). When the monkey is shown the target and instructed not to move when the go cue appears, the cell's activity decreases (bottom).

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 833

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


reaching, suggesting that the parietal cortex retains a

representation of potential actions that ultimately are

not executed.

Many neurons in premotor cortex also discharge during movement execution. Given this close proximity of planning- and execution-related activity, even at

the level of individual neurons, a major question is why planning-related neural activity does not immediately initiate a movement. What prevents the movement from being executed prematurely? It does not appear that planning-related activity simply fails to exceed a minimum threshold required to initiate the movement or that there is a separate overt braking mechanism that must be released to allow the movement to begin. A different way to interpret neural processing during the planning and execution of reaching that might provide answers to such questions comes from

a dynamical-systems perspective. The idea is that cortical motor circuits form a dynamical system whose distributed activity patterns evolve in time as a function of their initial state, input signals, and stochastic neural response variability ("noise"). Activity patterns during different stages of planning and execution thus reflect different states of the network, including a specific state during the delay period that can prepare the movement but not activate muscles (Figure 34–10). The overall similarity of the population-level activity patterns during repetitions of the same movement shows that the entire population undergoes a coordinated pattern of co-modulation of activity during the planning and execution of the movement, determined by the synaptic connectivity within the neural circuit. Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Applying

Rules (Associations) That Govern Behavior

## Behavior is often guided by arbitrary rules that link specific symbolic cues to particular actions. When

driving your car, you must perform different actions

depending on whether a traffic light is green, amber, r, or red. In monkeys that have learned to associate arbitrary cues with specific movements, many cells in premotor areas respond selectively to specific cues. For instance, in order to select the correct target in the twotarget study in Figure 34–8, the monkeys had to apply a rule that mapped color to target location provided by the two sequential instructional cues. The PMd is implicated in the acquisition of new movement-related associations or rules. In one experiment, recordings from PMd neurons were made while

the monkeys learned the association between four unfamiliar visual cues and four different movement

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

A BNeuron 3

Neuron 3

Left

reach

<!-- image -->

premotor cortex of monkeys during different stages of the

planning and execution of a movement can be viewed as

transitions between different activation states. (Adapted, with permission, from Churchland MM et al. 2010. Stimulus onset quenches neural variability: a widespread cortical phenomenon. Nat Neurosci 13:369-378. Copyright © Springer Nature.) A. A schematic illustration of how the simultaneous activity of neurons can be viewed as a trajectory through a multi-neuron activity "state space." The time-varying activity level of three

simultaneously recorded neurons is represented along three axes, which defines a three-neuron state space. A specific plan (reach left or reach right) requires different combinations of preparatory firing rates for the three neurons (gray zones). Prior to the formation of the intention to move left or right, the baseline activity of the three neurons occupies a region in state space that is associated with holding the arm in its current position (open circles, for two different trials). When an instruction appears to make a reach to the right, the combined activity of the three neurons changes in a coordinated fashion, creating time-varying "neural trajectories" (gray arrows) that converge on the region of state space that is associated with generating a rightward movement (filled circles within the "right reach" gray zone). B. Projection of the simultaneous activity of a large population of dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) neurons onto a twodimensional state space shortly before (pre-target) and after

(post-target) the appearance of a reach target cue in a task in which the reach movement must be delayed until a subsequent go cue is presented. Gray lines show the temporal evolution of the neural trajectories during the earliest part of movement preparation from 200 ms before target cue until the specified pre- or post-target time (black dots) in 15 different trials to the same target location. Neural activity initially meanders randomly within the region of state space associated with the starting posture of the arm (left). It then begins to converge onto a smaller region of the state space shortly after the reach target instruction appears (center) and begins to evolve along

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 834

the neural trajectory associated with entering the preparatory

state for the reach (right).

C. A more complete illustration of the neural trajectories

recorded during 18 different repeated trials to the same target in this delayed reaching task from the initial pre-target

postural state to the onset of movement. Blue dots indicate activity while holding the arm in the starting posture 100 ms before appearance of the target instruction onset. Once the target instruction appears, the neural trajectories evolve toward a region of state space associated with the preparatory activity state during the delay period (green zone), where it dwells until a go cue appears that allows the monkey to initiate the withheld movement (green dots). While in this reach-preparatory part of the state space during the delay period, the arm stays at the start position because PMd activity in that part of state space is not capable of activating muscles (ie, it is "output-null"). When the go cue appears, the neural trajectories unfold toward a different region of state space associated with the initiation of the intended reach movement (gray zone and black dots). The neural activity can only cause the muscle activity for the intended movement when it enters this "output-potent" zone of state space. The trial-to-trial variability of the neural trajectories can account for intertrial variability in movement kinematics and reaction times. One outlier trial (red) had a long reaction time and followed a more complex and time-consuming neural trajectory from the green to the gray zone. The output-null preparatory (green) and output-potent movement-initiation (gray) zones for reaches to different target locations occupy different regions of the total population state space distinct from those associated with this reach target. D. Data are for the same target location as in part C but were recorded on a different day. The neural trajectory structure is fundamentally similar for the same movements between

recording sessions. Differences in the overall pattern of activity can be explained by interday differences in the activity of individual neurons and differences in the composition of the recorded neural population between sessions.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

directions. Although the monkeys' choices were ini-

tially random, they learned the rules within a few dozen

trials. The monkeys made an arm movement in response

to each cue; during the early "guessing" phase of learning, the activity of many PMd neurons was weak but gradually increased in strength and directional tuning as the monkeys learned which cue signaled which movement. Other neurons showed a reciprocal decline in activity as the rules were acquired. These changes in activity during learning reflected both the movement choices and the rising level of knowledge of the rules linking cues with actions. The nature of the rule can also have a strong effect on neural responses. In monkeys that have been trained to choose between several possible move-

ments based on a spatial rule (a visual cue's location) or a semantic rule (a cue's arbitrarily designated meaning independent of its location), many prefrontal and PMd neurons are preferentially active when the animal chooses a movement using one rule but not the other. This shows that the neural activity is related not just to a particular cue or action but also to the association between them. Premotor areas are involved in the implementation of even abstract rules. For example, monkeys were trained in a task that required two decisions,

one perceptual and the other behavioral, that had no prior association. In each trial, the monkeys first had to decide whether two sequentially presented visual images were the same or different (a match/nonmatch perceptual decision). In some trials, a rule cue presented at the same time as the sample visual image instructed the monkeys to move their hand if the two images were identical and to refrain from moving if they differed (a go/no-go motor decision); in other trials, the rule was reversed—move if the images differ and do not move if they match. Neural activity in PMd after the test visual images were presented was correlated more strongly to the motor decision than the perceptual decision in each trial, but both decisions were expressed in PMd. More strikingly, PMd activity was also correlated with the match/non-match behavioral rule during the delay period between the two visual images that guided the motor decision after the test image appeared (Figure 34–11). These results suggest that PMd has a major role in applying rules that govern the appropriateness of a behavior and in making behavioral decisions according to the prevailing rules. Neural recordings in prefrontal cortex during the same task (not shown) found a strong representation of the physical identity of the visual images, but weaker and later correlates of the behavioral rule and the motor decision than in PMd.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 835

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices

Ventral Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning

Motor Actions of the Hand

## The most lateral part of the premotor cortex, area PMv, is reciprocally connected with parietal cortex areas

AIP, PF, and PFG and the secondary somatosensory

area. Electrical stimulation shows that PMv contains extensively overlapping circuits that control hand and mouth movements. Like AIP neurons, many PMv neurons appear to contribute to the control of hand actions based on the physical affordances offered by target objects. These

neurons tend to fire preferentially during certain stereotypical hand actions, such as grasping, holding, tearing, or manipulating objects. Many neurons discharge only if the monkey uses a specific type of grip, such as a precision grip, whole-hand prehension, or finger prehension (Figure 34–12). Precision grip is the type most often represented. Some PMv neurons discharge throughout the entire action, while others discharge selectively at particular stages of one type of prehension, such as during the opening or closing of the fingers. Another striking property of PMv neurons is that their discharge often correlates with the goal of a motor act and not with the individual movements forming it.

Thus, many PMv neurons discharge when grasping an object is executed with effectors as different as the right hand, the left hand, and even the mouth. Conversely, a PMv neuron may be active when an index finger is flexed to grasp an object but not when the animal flexes the same finger to scratch itself. Premotor Cortex May Contribute to Perceptual

Decisions That Guide Motor Actions

## A series of studies provide evidence that cortical motor areas not only represent the sensory information that

guides voluntary movements but also express the neu-

ral operations necessary to make and act on perceptual decisions. Monkeys were trained to discriminate the difference in frequency between two brief vibratory stimuli applied to one finger and separated in time by a few seconds. The animals had to decide whether the frequency of the second stimulus was higher or lower than the first and to report their perceptual decision by reaching out to push one of two buttons with the other hand. The decision-making process in this task can be conceived as a chain of neural operations: (1) encode the first stimulus frequency (f1) when it is presented;

(2) maintain a representation of f1 in working memory during the interval between the two stimuli; (3) encode the second stimulus frequency (f2) when it is

18/01/21 6:08 PM



Part V / Movement

A Delayed match-to-sample task

Rule for

release Sample image Delay Test image 1 Delay Test image 2

Match

rule

+

+

<!-- image -->

B Premotor neurons show rule-dependent activity

Sample image A

## Rule Delay cue Sample image

Match

(release)

Nonmatch

(release)

rules. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wallis and Miller 2003.)

Test

image 1


between the presentation of the first and second images. The

A. A monkey must make a decision about whether to release a lever or keep holding it based on two prior decisions: a perceptual choice, whether a test image is the same as or differ-

<!-- image -->

ent from a sample image presented earlier, and a behavioral choice, whether the current rule is to release the lever when the test image is the same as the sample (match rule) or when it is different (nonmatch rule). The monkey is informed of the behavioral rule that applies in each trial by a rule cue, such as an auditory tone or juice drops, which is presented for 100 ms at the same time as the onset of the sample image at the start of the trial. presented; (4) compare f2 to the memory trace of f1;

responses to two different sample images (upper and lower plots) were recorded from the same cell, indicating that the ruledependent activity is not altered by changing the images. Nor, as shown by the pairs of curves associated with each rule, does activity depend on the type of rule cue (auditory tone or juice drops). (Tone cue trials: orange and blue curves; juice cue trials: red and black curves). Other dorsal premotor cortex cells (not shown) respond preferentially to the match rule over the nonmatch rule. The differential activity of the neuron up to presentation of the test image reflects the rule that will guide the animal's motor response to the test image, not the physical properties of the visual stimuli or the motor response. Strikingly, however, the activity of many neurons

(5) decide whether the frequency of f2 is higher or

lower than that of f1; and finally, (6) use that decision

to choose the appropriate movement of the other hand. Everything prior to the last step would appear to fall entirely within the domain of sensory discriminative processing. While the monkeys performed the task, neurons in the primary (S-I) and secondary (S-II) somatosensory cortices encoded the frequencies of the stimuli

while they were presented. During the interval between f1 and f2, there was no sustained activity in S-I representing the memorized f1 and only a transient representation in S-II, which vanished before f2 was presented.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 836

in the prefrontal cortex, SMC, and PMv scaled with

the frequencies of f1 and f2 while they were being

delivered. Furthermore, some prefrontal and premotor neurons showed sustained activity proportional to the frequency of f1 during the delay period between f1 and f2. Most remarkably, many neurons in those areas, especially in PMv, encoded the difference in frequency between f2 and f1 independently of their actual frequencies when f2 was delivered (Figure 34–13). This centrally generated signal is appropriate to mediate the perceptual discrimination that determines which button to push. Neurons that encoded the f2–f1 difference were absent in S-I and were far more common in SMC and PMv than in S-II.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

A Precision grip Contralateral hand Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices Ipsilateral hand

<!-- image -->

ing.  This neuron discharges vigorously during a precision grip

with the thumb and index finger of either the right or the left hand but very weakly during whole-hand prehension with either hand. Several Cortical Motor Areas Are Active When the

Motor Actions of Others Are Being Observed

## Some premotor and parietal areas can be activated when no overt action is intended, such as when an individual is asked to imagine performing a certain

motor act. This phenomenon, termed motor imagery, has been demonstrated in humans using functional brain imaging. The neural activity evoked by motor imagery presumably reflects brain mechanisms associated with motor planning and preparation that have been disassociated from its overt execution.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 837


Raster plots and histograms are aligned (vertical line) with the

moment the monkey touches the food (A) or grasps the handle

(B). (Reproduced, with permission, from Rizzolatti et al. 1988.

Copyright © Springer-Verlag 1988.)

A second condition in which cortical motor cir


-

cuits are activated without intending overt action is

when an individual observes another individual per-

forming motor acts that are part of her own motor repertoire. The control of behavior and social interaction depends greatly on the ability to recognize and understand what others are doing and why they are doing it. Such understanding could result from a highorder visual perceptual analysis of the nature of the observed behavior and by drawing inferences about the motivation and purpose of the behavior based on

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

one's own experience. An alternative explanation is

the direct-matching hypothesis, the idea that observation

of the actions of others activates motor circuits in the

observer that control similar motor actions. Accord -ing to this hypothesis, empathetic activation of motor circuits could provide a link between the observed actions and the observer's stored knowledge of the nature, motives, and consequences of similar actions that they had performed in the past. Striking evidence in support of the direct-matching hypothesis was provided by the discovery of a remarkable population of neurons called mirror neurons, first

Figure 34–13 (Right) Neural activity in ventral premoin PMv and later in the parietal AIP of monkeys. Mirror neurons discharge both when the monkey actively grasps and manipulates objects and when it observes similar actions performed by another monkey or the experimenter (Figure 34–14). Mirror neurons typically do not respond when a monkey simply observes a potential target object or when it observes mimed arm and hand actions without a target object. Some parietal mirror neurons can even differentiate the ultimate goal of similar observed actions, such as grasping and picking up food to eat it versus putting it into a cup.

tor cortex in monkeys expresses the operations required

to choose a motor response based on sensory informa-

tion. (Adapted, with permission, from Romo, Hernández, and Zainos 2004. Copyright © 2004 Cell Press.) A. These records of three neurons in the ventral premotor cortex of a monkey were made while the animal performed a task in which it had to decide whether the second of two vibra

tion stimuli (f1 and f2, applied to the index finger of one hand) was of higher or lower frequency than the first. The choice was signaled by pushing one of two buttons with the nonstimulated hand. The frequencies of f1 and f2 are indicated by the numbers on the left of each set of raster plots. Cell 1 encoded the frequencies of both f1 and f2 while the stimuli were being presented but was not active at any other time. This response profile resembles that of many neurons in the primary somatosensory cortex. Cell 2 encoded the frequency of f1 and sustained its response during the delay period. During the presentation of f2, the neuron's response was enhanced when f1 was higher than f2 and suppressed when it was lower. Cell 3 responded to f1 during stimulation and was weakly active during the delay period. However, during exposure to f2, the cell's activity robustly signaled the difference f2–f1 independently of the specific frequencies f1 and f2. B. Histograms show the percentage of neurons in different cortical areas whose activity correlated at each instant with different parameters during the tactile discrimination task. Green

shows the correlation with f1, red the correlation with f2, black the interaction between f1and f2, and blue the correlation with the difference between f2–f1. (Abbreviations: M1, primary motor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; S-I, primary somatosensory cortex; S-II, secondary somatosensory cortex; SMA , supplementary motor area.)

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 838

<!-- image -->

A

Cell 1

f1

f2


18/01/21 6:08 PM
Part V / Movement

one's own experience. An alternative explanation is

the direct-matching hypothesis, the idea that observation

of the actions of others activates motor circuits in the

observer that control similar motor actions. Accord -ing to this hypothesis, empathetic activation of motor circuits could provide a link between the observed actions and the observer's stored knowledge of the nature, motives, and consequences of similar actions that they had performed in the past. Striking evidence in support of the direct-matching hypothesis was provided by the discovery of a remarkable population of neurons called mirror neurons, first

Figure 34–13 (Right) Neural activity in ventral premoin PMv and later in the parietal AIP of monkeys. Mirror neurons discharge both when the monkey actively grasps and manipulates objects and when it observes similar actions performed by another monkey or the experimenter (Figure 34–14). Mirror neurons typically do not respond when a monkey simply observes a potential target object or when it observes mimed arm and hand actions without a target object. Some parietal mirror neurons can even differentiate the ultimate goal of similar observed actions, such as grasping and picking up food to eat it versus putting it into a cup.

tor cortex in monkeys expresses the operations required

to choose a motor response based on sensory informa-

tion. (Adapted, with permission, from Romo, Hernández, and Zainos 2004. Copyright © 2004 Cell Press.) A. These records of three neurons in the ventral premotor cortex of a monkey were made while the animal performed a task in which it had to decide whether the second of two vibra

tion stimuli (f1 and f2, applied to the index finger of one hand) was of higher or lower frequency than the first. The choice was signaled by pushing one of two buttons with the nonstimulated hand. The frequencies of f1 and f2 are indicated by the numbers on the left of each set of raster plots. Cell 1 encoded the frequencies of both f1 and f2 while the stimuli were being presented but was not active at any other time. This response profile resembles that of many neurons in the primary somatosensory cortex. Cell 2 encoded the frequency of f1 and sustained its response during the delay period. During the presentation of f2, the neuron's response was enhanced when f1 was higher than f2 and suppressed when it was lower. Cell 3 responded to f1 during stimulation and was weakly active during the delay period. However, during exposure to f2, the cell's activity robustly signaled the difference f2–f1 independently of the specific frequencies f1 and f2. B. Histograms show the percentage of neurons in different cortical areas whose activity correlated at each instant with different parameters during the tactile discrimination task. Green

shows the correlation with f1, red the correlation with f2, black the interaction between f1and f2, and blue the correlation with the difference between f2–f1. (Abbreviations: M1, primary motor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; S-I, primary somatosensory cortex; S-II, secondary somatosensory cortex; SMA , supplementary motor area.)

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 838

<!-- image -->

A

Cell 1

f1

f2


18/01/21 6:08 PM

Neural-recording and brain-imaging studies show

that humans are also endowed with a mirror-like mecha

-

nism to match observed actions with actions encoded in

their motor system. This activity arises in various areas of cortex, including the rostral inferior parietal lobule, IPS, PMv, and posterior sector of the inferior frontal gyrus. Cortical motor circuits appear to be involved in understanding and predicting the outcomes of observed events. In one experiment, PMd neurons implicated

in the selection of reaching targets using visual cues (Figure 34–8) also discharged when monkeys simply watched the same cues and cursor motions on the monitor while an unseen party performed the task. The monkeys received a free juice reward when the cursor moved to the correct target but not if it moved to the wrong target. The monkeys began to lick the juice tube shortly after the cursor started to move to the correct target well before the juice was actually delivered, but A

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


quickly removed their mouth from the tube when the

cursor moved toward the wrong target. This behavior

showed that the monkeys correctly interpreted what

they saw and accurately predicted its consequences. Remarkably, the activity of most of the taskrelated PMd neurons was strikingly similar whether the monkeys used visual cues to plan and make arm

movements or simply observed the visual events and predicted their outcome. Those neurons stopped responding during observation if no reward was delivered after correct trials or if the animal was sated and not interested in drinking juice. This showed that the neurons were not simply responding to the sensory inputs, but instead were processing the observed sensory events to predict their ultimate outcome for the monkey, namely the likelihood of a free juice reward. This activation in connection with passive observation supports the idea that activation of premotor

<!-- image -->

Rizzolatti et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 Elsevier Science B.V.)

A. The neuron is active when the monkey grasps an object. B. The same neuron is also excited when the monkey observes

another monkey grasping the object.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 839

1.5 s

C. The neuron is similarly activated when the monkey observes

Time zero in the cell activity rasters corresponds approxi-

- mately to the time of presentation of the object to grasp (panel A) or the onset of the observed grasping actions (panels B and C).

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

circuits in nonmotor contexts may contribute to under-

standing the nature and consequences of observed

events in the environment. It has also been implicated

in the ability of human subjects to learn new motor skills simply by observing a skilled person perform the same actions. Moreover, dysfunction of the mirrorneuron system in young children may contribute to some of the symptoms of autism. Many Aspects of Voluntary Control Are Distributed Across Parietal and Premotor Cortex

## While we have described the roles of premotor areas in parietal and precentral cortex separately, it must be

(Reproduced, with permission, from Schaffelhofer and PMv

Scherberger 2016.) A. A set of "mixed" objects elicit different visual responses and require different motor responses to grasp them. The plots show the percentages of neurons in the anterior intraparietal

<!-- image -->

areas (AIP; orange), ventral premotor cortex (PMv; F5; dark green), and primary motor cortex (M1; light green) that significantly modulated their response as a function of object identity across time. Monkeys were first shown the object to grasp (cue and planning periods) and then allowed to reach to, grasp, and hold the object (grasp and hold periods). The proportion of neurons that varied their activity across object types (tuned neurons) during the cue and planning periods was greatest in

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 840

AIP

PMv

M1

1.2 1.6

and hold periods), the reverse pattern was observed, with

many neurons in PMv and especially M1 displaying a strong dependence on the different grasping actions required to hold onto the different objects. B. A set of "abstract" objects elicit different visual responses but require similar motor responses to grasp them. As with the "mixed" object set, many AIP neurons varied their activity as a

function of object shape during the cue and planning periods, but fewer PMv and almost no M1 neurons showed sensitivity to observed object shape. During motor action (grasp and hold periods), very few PMv and M1 neurons showed any difference in activity as a function of the shape of the different objects, all of which required the same grasping action.

emphasized that major sensorimotor control processes

are shared across multiple cortical regions via their

reciprocal interconnections.

For instance, the neural processes that link the physical affordances of target objects to appropriate hand actions are distributed across parietal area

AIP, premotor area PMv, and M1, with visuospatial aspects of the process more prominent in AIP and motor components more prevalent in precentral cortex (Figure 34–15). Likewise, as already noted, neural correlates of reach target selection in PRR (Figure 34–8B) strikingly resemble those reported in PMd (Figure 34–8A).

M1

AIP

18/01/21 6:08 PM

The Primary Motor Cortex Plays an Important

Role in Motor Execution Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


movement of that body part was perturbed or lost

after the animal recovered from surgery. These early

experiments showed that the motor cortex contains

## Once an individual has decided on a behavioral goal, motor commands must then be communicated to mus

cles to move the body. The complexity of this problem

cannot be underestimated as it requires precise control of the spatiotemporal patterns of activity of large numbers of muscles acting across many joints to achieve the behavioral goal, while also accounting for the complex, nonlinear mechanical properties of the musculoskeletal system and forces and loads imposed by the environment. These detailed patterns of muscle activity are coordinated by spinal motor neurons and interneuronal circuits (Chapter 32). However, the primary motor cortex (M1) plays an important role in generating the motor commands that control that spinal activity, including essential information necessary to select and control the timing and magnitude of muscle activity. The Primary Motor Cortex Includes a Detailed Map of the Motor Periphery

-an orderly motor map of major parts of the contralateral body and that the integrity of the motor map is necessary for voluntary control of the corresponding body parts. Studies in the first half of the 20th century on many species by Clinton Woolsey and on humans undergoing surgery by Wilder Penfield demonstrated that the general topographic organization of the rostral bank of the central sulcus is conserved across many species (Figure 34–16). One important observation was that the motor map is not an exact point-to-point reproduction of the body's anatomical form. Instead, the most finely controlled body parts, such as the fingers, face, and mouth, are represented by disproportionately large areas, reflecting the larger number of neurons needed for fine motor control. Today the best-studied regions of the map are those parts controlling the arm and hand and reveal far more complexity than conveyed in the classic

## The idea that a local region of the cerebral cortex contains a motor map of the body dedicated to voluntary motor control dates back to the work of the English

neurologist John Hughlings Jackson in the middle of the 19th century. He reached this conclusion while treating patients with epileptic seizures that were characterized by recurring spasmodic involuntary movements that sometimes resembled fragments of purposive voluntary actions and that progressed systematically to include different parts of the body during each seizure episode (Chapter 58). Later in the 19th century, improved anesthesia and aseptic surgical techniques allowed direct experimental study of the cerebral cortex in experimental animals. Using those new methods, Gustav Fritsch and Eduard Hitzig in Berlin and David Ferrier in England showed that electrical stimulation of the surface of a limited area of cortex in different anesthetized mammalian species evoked movements of parts of the contralateral body. In monkeys, the electric currents needed to evoke movements were lowest in a narrow strip along the rostral bank of the central sulcus, the same region now called primary motor cortex. Their experiments demonstrated that within this strip of tissue stimulation of adjacent sites evoked movements in adjacent body parts, starting with the

foot, leg, and tail medially, and proceeding to the trunk, arm, hand, face, mouth, and tongue more laterally. When they lesioned a cortical site at which stimulation had evoked movements of a part of the body,

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 841

diagrams shown in Figure 34–16A,B. First, neurons controlling the muscles of the digits, hand, and distal arm tend to be concentrated within a central zone, whereas those controlling more proximal arm muscles are located in a horseshoe-shaped ring around the central core (Figure 34–16C). Second, stimulation sites overlap extensively, allowing control of muscles acting across different joints; conversely, each muscle can be activated by stimulating many sites dispersed across the arm/hand motor map. Finally, local horizontal axonal connections link different sites across the motor map, likely allowing coordination of activity across the map during the formation of motor commands. Some Neurons in the Primary Motor Cortex Project Directly to Spinal Motor Neurons

## As already noted, while many corticospinal axons in primates terminate only on spinal interneurons, others also synapse directly onto spinal motor neurons. These

corticomotoneuronal (CM) cells are found only in the most caudal part of M1 that lies within the anterior bank of the central sulcus. There is extensive overlap in the distribution of the CM cells that project to the spinal motor neuron pools innervating different muscles (Figure 34–17A). CM cells are very rare or absent in nonprimate species and become a progressively larger component of the corticospinal tract in primate phylogeny from

prosimians to monkeys, great apes, and humans. In monkeys, more CM cells project to the motor pools for muscles of the digits, hand, and wrist than to

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

A Macaque monkey B Human emphasized that this cartoon illustrated the relative size of the representation of each body part in the motor map; he did not

<!-- image -->

of motor output to different parts of the body.

A. Studies by Clinton Woolsey and colleagues confirmed that the

representation of different body parts in the monkey follows an orderly plan. Motor output to the foot and leg is medial, whereas

the arm, face, and mouth areas are more lateral. The areas of cortex controlling the foot, hand, and mouth are much larger than the regions controlling other parts of the body. B. Wilder Penfield and colleagues showed that the human motor cortex motor map has the same general mediolateral organization as in the monkey. However, the areas control- claim that each body part was controlled by a single separate

rpart of the motor map. C. The arm motor map in monkeys has a concentric, horseshoe-shaped organization. Neurons that control the distal arm (digits and wrist) are concentrated in a central core (pale

ling the hand and mouth are even larger than in monkeys, whereas the area controlling the foot is much smaller. Penfield

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 842

green) surrounded by neurons that control the proximal arm (elbow and shoulder; dark green). The neuron populations that control the distal and proximal parts of the arm overlap extensively in a zone of proximal-distal co-facilitation (intermediate green). (Reproduced, with permission, from Park et al. 2001. Copyright © 2001 Society for Neuroscience.)

18/01/21 6:08 PM

A

M1

<!-- image -->

B

M1

Adductor

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

pollicis

digitorum

<!-- image -->

Figure 34–17 Corticomotoneuronal cells activate complex

muscle patterns through divergent connections with spinal

motor neurons that innervate different arm muscles


2 mm

<!-- image -->

.

A. Corticomotoneuronal (CM) cells, which project monosynaptically to spinal motor neurons, are located almost exclusively within the anterior bank of the central sulcus in the caudal

part of the primary motor cortex (M1). The CM cells that control a single hand muscle are widely distributed throughout the arm motor map, and there is extensive overlap of the distribution of neurons projecting to different hand muscles. The distributions of the cell bodies of CM cells that project to the spinal motor pools that innervate the adductor pollicis, abductor pollicis longus, and extensor digitorum communis (shown on the right) illustrate this pattern of wide distribution and extensive overlap of CM cells projecting to different muscles. (Abbreviations: M, medial; R, rostral.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Rathelot and Strick 2006.)

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 843

<!-- image -->

Anterior bank of

the central sulcus

R

Corticomotoneuron

cell clusters

Extensor

motor neuron

Inhibitory

interneurons

Flexor motor

neuron pools

B. A single CM axon terminal is shown arborized in the ventral

horn of one segment of the spinal cord. It forms synapses

with the spinal motor neuron pools of four different intrinsic

hand muscles (yellow and blue zones), as well as with surrounding interneuronal networks. Each axon has several such terminal arborizations distributed along several spinal segments. (Reproduced, with permission, from Shinoda, Yokota, and Futami 1981.) C. Different colonies of CM cells in the primary motor cortex terminate on different combinations of spinal interneuron networks and spinal motor pools, thus activating different

combinations of agonist and antagonist muscles. Many other corticospinal axons terminate only on spinal interneurons (not shown). The figure shows CM projections largely onto extensor motor neuron pools. Flexor motor pools receive similar complex projections (not shown). (Adapted, with permission, from Cheney, Fetz, and Palmer 1985.)

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

those for more proximal parts of the arm. The termi-

nal of a CM cell axon often branches and terminates

on spinal motor neurons for several different agonist able to control movements of every part of the body, with special focus on the fingers, hand, arm, face, and mouth in primates.

-Activity in the Primary Motor Cortex Reflects Many Spatial and Temporal Features of Motor Output

## As already noted, a given action such as reaching for an object can be described on many levels, ranging from the hand's spatial trajectory and velocity to

muscles and can also influence the contractile activ ity of still more muscles through synapses on spinal interneurons (Figure 34–17B,C). This termination pattern is organized to produce coordinated patterns of activity in a muscle field of agonist and antagonist muscles. Most frequently, a CM cell axon directly excites the spinal motor neurons for several agonist muscles and indirectly suppresses the activity of some antagonist muscles through spinal inhibitory interneurons (Figure 34–17C). The fact that CM cells are more prominent in humans than in other species may be one of the reasons why lesions of M1 in humans have a more profound effect on voluntary motor control compared to other mammals (Box 34–3). The complexity of the motor map in M1—as revealed by short trains of electrical stimuli and anatomical and neurophysiological studies of direct and

indirect M1 descending outputs targeting single muscles and small muscle groups—shows how motor commands from M1 to the spinal motor apparatus are its joint-centered causal forces and muscle activity (Figure 34–1A). Representational models assume that the motor system directly plans and controls specific parameters of movement. They predict that different neural populations encode the intended movement in a parameter space (ie, hand or joint motion or joint muscular torque) and perform the transformations between them. Dynamical models predict that neural circuits control movements through changes in their activation state from its current state to the desired final state. As their activity changes across time, correlates of various parameters and properties of the intended movement can be observed in the activity

Box 34–3 Lesions in Primary Motor Cortex Lead to Impairments in Motor Execution

## The effects of primary motor cortex (M1) lesions differ leg, or face, lead to paralysis of that body part. There

across species. Large lesions in cats do not cause paraly-

sis; the animals can move and walk on a flat open sur-

face. However, they have severe difficulties using visual information to navigate within a complex environment, avoid obstacles, or climb the rungs of a ladder. In cats, the pyramidal tract neurons in M1 are much more strongly activated when an animal must modify its normal stepping motion to clear an obstacle under visual guidance than during normal unimpeded locomotion over a flat, featureless surface (Chapter 33). Large M1 lesions in monkeys have more drastic consequences, including initial paralysis and usually the permanent loss of independent movements of the

thumb and fingers. Monkeys nevertheless recover some ability to make clumsy movements of the hands and arms and to walk and climb. More focal lesions of M1 typically result in muscle weakness, slowing and imprecision of movements, and discoordination of multi-joint motions, perhaps as

a result of selective perturbations of the control circuitry for specific muscles or muscle groups. Lesions limited to part of the motor map, such as the contralateral arm,

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 844

is diminished use of the affected body part, and move-

ments of the distal extremities are much more affected

than those of the proximal arm and trunk. The severity of the deficits also depends on the level of required skill. Control of fine motor skills, such as independent movements of the fingers and hand and

precision grip, is abolished. Any residual control of the fingers and the hand is usually reduced to clumsy, clawlike, synchronous flexion and extension motions of all fingers, not unlike the unskilled grasps of young infants. Remaining motor functions, such as postural activity, locomotion, reaching, and grasping objects with the whole hand, are often clumsy. In humans, large motor cortex lesions are particularly devastating, resulting in severe motor deficits or complete paralysis of affected body parts, usually with

limited potential for recovery. This presumably reflects the increased importance in humans of descending signals from M1 onto spinal interneuronal circuits and spinal motor neurons and a diminished capacity of other cortical and subcortical motor structures to compensate for the loss of those descending M1 signals.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

of single neurons and neural populations. However,

the activity of most neurons reflects a combination of

parameters that does not correspond to any identifi-

able parameter in any specific coordinate framework. Despite their different assumptions, both perspectives suggest that one can infer the possible contribution of different neurons and different neural structures to

motor control by studying how their activity correlates with different parameters of movements. The activity of M1 neurons has been intensively studied since the 1960s to try to reveal, for instance, whether M1 generates a high-level signal about the hand motion or a lower-level kinetic signal more related to the causal forces and muscle activity. Knowledge about the nature of the control signals generated by M1 also helps to clarify the role of other motor structures, notably the spinal cord. If M1 encodes

specific information about muscle activity patterns, less computational processing would be necessary at the spinal level. In contrast, if M1 mainly encodes higher-level information about the intended movement, the spinal cord would have to perform the processes that convert this global signal into detailed patterns of muscle activity. However, one of the major experimental challenges in identifying how M1 controls movement is the fact that virtually all movement-related param-

eters are intercorrelated through the laws of motion. As a consequence, a particular muscular force (kinetics) will cause a specific motion (kinematics) given an initial condition (posture, movement) of the body. As a result, if one recorded neural activity while a monkey makes reaching movements in different directions, a neuron that theoretically signals the spatial direction of movement will also inevitably show a correlation with the direction of causal forces. Likewise, the contractile activity of a muscle will co-vary systematically with the spatial direction of movement even though it is clearly generating the causal forces. Unless the task design adequately dissociates these different classes of parameters, it will yield ambiguous information about the functional role of each neuron. Edward Evarts was the first to examine this issue in the 1960s, in pioneering single-neuron recordings in monkeys while they made simple flexion/extension

movements of the wrist. Using a system of pulleys and weights, he applied a load to the wrist of the monkey that pulled the wrist in either the direction of flexion or extension in different trials. This required the monkey to alter the level of wrist muscle activity to compensate for the load while making the movements. As a result, the kinematics (direction and amplitude) of wrist movements remained constant, but the kinetics (forces and muscle activity) changed with the load.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 845

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


Using a microelectrode, he located single neurons

in the M1 motor map that modulated their activity

when the monkey made movements of the wrist with-

out the external load. In some neurons, their discharge increased during wrist flexion (preferred movement direction) and was suppressed during extension, whereas others displayed the opposite pattern. This movementrelated activity typically began 50 to 150 ms before the onset of agonist muscle activity, supporting a causal link between M1 neural activity and movement. When a load was applied, many M1 neurons increased their activity when the load resisted movement in their preferred direction and decreased activity when the load assisted the movement (Figure 34–18). These changes in neural activity paralleled the changes in muscle activity required to compensate for the external load. Subsequent studies have confirmed that the activity of many M1 neurons varies systematically with the magnitude of muscle force output. This is best shown

in tasks in which monkeys generate isometric forces against immovable objects that prevent movement. The activity of many M1 neurons, including CM cells, varies with the direction and level of static isometric output forces generated across a single joint, such as the wrist or elbow, as well as during precise pinches using the thumb and index finger (Figure 34–19A). At least over part of the tested range, these responses vary linearly with the level of static force. Most natural behaviors involve multi-joint, multimuscle actions. For instance, reaching movements of the arm in different directions requires different pat-

terns of coordinated motions at the shoulder and elbow. Proximal limb muscle activity during reaching shows a roughly cosine pattern of activity with maximal activity in a specific movement direction, its preferred movement direction, that gradually diminishes as the angle between the desired direction of reach and the muscle's preferred direction increases (Figure 34–20A). Like the proximal arm muscles, single neurons related to shoulder and elbow movements respond in a continuously graded fashion during movements in different reach directions centered on a preferred direction of maximal activity (Figure 34–20B). Different neurons have different preferred directions that cover the entire directional continuum around the circle, and during any given movement, neurons with a wide range of preferred directions discharge at different rates. As Ed Evarts had shown in single-joint tasks, much of the M1 activity during reaching is closely related to the causal kinetics. For instance, in monkeys trained

to make reaching movements in eight directions while compensating for external loads that pulled the arm in different directions, the reach-related activity of both

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

Potentiometer

measures

wrist angle Recording from neuron in wrist area of M1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Weight

assists exors

Figure 34–18 Activity of a motor cortex neuron correlates

with changes in the direction and amplitude of muscle

forces during wrist movements.  The records are from an

M1 neuron with an axon that projected down the pyramidal tract. The monkey flexes its wrist under three load conditions. When no load is applied to the wrist, the neuron fires before and during flexion (A). When a load opposing flexion is applied, the activity of the flexor muscles and the neuron increases proximal-arm muscles and many M1 neurons changed systematically with the direction of the external loads

<!-- image -->

and the corresponding corrective forces that the mon-

keys had to generate for each reach direction. Both muscle and neural activity increased when the load

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 846

Lever

position

<!-- image -->

B Load opposes exors

## Flexors

<!-- image -->

C Load assists exors

## Flexors

Extensors

<!-- image -->

(B). When a load assisting wrist flexion is applied, the flexor

muscles and neuron fall silent (C). In all three conditions, the

wrist displacement is the same, but the neural activity changes

as the loads and compensatory muscle activity change. Thus, the activity of this motor cortex neuron is better related to the direction and level of forces and to muscle activity exerted during the movement than to the direction of wrist displacement. (Adapted from Evarts 1968.) resisted movements in their preferred directions and decreased when the loads assisted those movements.

In addition, when a monkey uses its whole arm to exert

constant isometric force levels in different directions at the hand, the activity of many M1 neurons varies

18/01/21 6:08 PM

Flexion A Neuronal activity increases with the amplitude of static torque in an isometric action.


A. The activity of many primary motor cortex neurons increases with the amplitude of static torque generated across a single joint. The plot shows the tonic firing rates of several different

<!-- image -->

corticomotoneuronal cells at different levels of static torque exerted in the direction of wrist extension. Other motor cortex neurons show increasing activity with torque exerted in the direction of wrist flexion, and so would show response functions with the opposite slope (not shown). (Reproduced, with permission, from Fetz and Cheney 1980.) B. When a monkey uses its whole arm to push on an immovable handle in its hand, the activity of some primary motor

- systematically with force direction, and the directional

tuning curves for isometric force resemble those for

activity during reaching movements (Figure 34–19B).

The complex and nonlinear properties of multisegmented limbs present a major control problem for the motor system. For instance, one can make reaching

movements with similar hand trajectories but different arm geometries that require changes in the causal joint-centered torques and muscle activity. In one experiment, when monkeys made horizontal reaching movements along the same planar spatial hand trajectories while holding the arm in different spatial orientations (ie, elbow raised versus lowered), the activity of proximal-arm muscles and many M1 neurons showed corresponding changes in the strength and directional

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 847

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


B Neuronal activity varies with the direction of isometric force

primary motor cortex neuron during five repeated force ramps

in one direction. Each row shows the pattern of spikes during a single trial of the task. The position of each raster of activity corresponds to the direction in which the monkey is generating isometric forces on the handle. The onset of the force ramp is indicated by the vertical line labeled M. The thick ticks on the left of that line in each row indicate when the target appeared on a computer monitor, telling the monkey the direction in which it should push on the handle. The central polar plot illustrates the directional tuning function of the neuron as a function of the direction of isometric forces. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sergio and Kalaska 2003.) tuning of their reach-related activity. This indicates that

the M1 neurons generate signals that take into account

the changes in intrinsic limb biomechanics during the

reaching movements. Similarly, arm movements toward or away from the body require much larger angular motion at the shoulder and elbow joints compared to movements to

the right or left. In contrast, muscular torques tend to be larger for movements to the right and left. Both of these factors influence the amount of muscle activity required to move the limb, which can be quantified by a single term, joint muscular power (joint angular velocity multiplied by net muscular torque about that joint). With the limb in the horizontal plane, joint power is greatest for movements away from the body and slightly to the left,

18/01/21 6:08 PM
A Neuronal activity increases with

the amplitude of static torque


in an isometric action.

A. The activity of many primary motor cortex neurons increases with the amplitude of static torque generated across a single joint. The plot shows the tonic firing rates of several different

<!-- image -->

corticomotoneuronal cells at different levels of static torque exerted in the direction of wrist extension. Other motor cortex neurons show increasing activity with torque exerted in the direction of wrist flexion, and so would show response functions with the opposite slope (not shown). (Reproduced, with permission, from Fetz and Cheney 1980.) B. When a monkey uses its whole arm to push on an immovable handle in its hand, the activity of some primary motor

- systematically with force direction, and the directional

tuning curves for isometric force resemble those for

activity during reaching movements (Figure 34–19B).

The complex and nonlinear properties of multisegmented limbs present a major control problem for the motor system. For instance, one can make reaching

movements with similar hand trajectories but different arm geometries that require changes in the causal joint-centered torques and muscle activity. In one experiment, when monkeys made horizontal reaching movements along the same planar spatial hand trajectories while holding the arm in different spatial orientations (ie, elbow raised versus lowered), the activity of proximal-arm muscles and many M1 neurons showed corresponding changes in the strength and directional

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 847

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


B Neuronal activity varies with the direction of isometric force

primary motor cortex neuron during five repeated force ramps

in one direction. Each row shows the pattern of spikes during a single trial of the task. The position of each raster of activity corresponds to the direction in which the monkey is generating isometric forces on the handle. The onset of the force ramp is indicated by the vertical line labeled M. The thick ticks on the left of that line in each row indicate when the target appeared on a computer monitor, telling the monkey the direction in which it should push on the handle. The central polar plot illustrates the directional tuning function of the neuron as a function of the direction of isometric forces. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sergio and Kalaska 2003.) tuning of their reach-related activity. This indicates that

the M1 neurons generate signals that take into account

the changes in intrinsic limb biomechanics during the

reaching movements. Similarly, arm movements toward or away from the body require much larger angular motion at the shoulder and elbow joints compared to movements to

the right or left. In contrast, muscular torques tend to be larger for movements to the right and left. Both of these factors influence the amount of muscle activity required to move the limb, which can be quantified by a single term, joint muscular power (joint angular velocity multiplied by net muscular torque about that joint). With the limb in the horizontal plane, joint power is greatest for movements away from the body and slightly to the left,

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

A Posterior deltoid EMG activity B Primary motor cortex cell activity

<!-- image -->

A. Plots show the activity of posterior deltoid of the right arm,

a shoulder extensor, during arm movements in eight directions (see panel C) (central panel displays mean hand trajectories).

The muscle is initially maximally active for movements at 270° (towards the body, preferred direction = 250°) and diminishes for movements in other directions. Black lines denote the mean activity of the muscle across multiple trials, and data are aligned on movement onset (vertical thin line). (Abbreviation: EMG, electromyography.) B. Raster plots show the firing pattern of a single primary motor cortex neuron during whole-arm movements in eight directions. The neuron discharges at the maximal rate for move-




C. Hand trajectories when reaching from a central position in

the horizontal plane. D. Peak joint power (joint muscular torques multiplied by

joint velocity) for movements performed in different spatial directions (shoulder and elbow power added together). A large amount of power is required to reach away from the

body and to the upper left and to reach toward the body and to the lower right. (Right X-axis is at 0°.) E. Preferred directions of proximal-limb muscles tend to be for movements that require greater muscular power, reflecting the obvious link between muscle use and the physical require-

-ments of the motor task. Each dot represents an individual muscle binned into 22.5° sectors; the blue dot represents the preferred direction of the muscle displayed in panel A . F. Distribution of preferred directions of neurons in primary motor cortex (M1). Each dot represents an individual neuron, and the blue dot represents the preferred direction of the neuron displayed in panel B. (Adapted, with permission, from Scott et al. 2001.)

ments near 135° and 180° and at lesser intensities for move ments in other directions. The cell's lowest firing rate is for movements opposite the cell's preferred direction. Each row of thin tics in each raster plot represents the activity in a single trial, aligned at the time of movement onset (time 0); thick tics, time of target appearance. (Reproduced, with permission,

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 848


18/01/21 6:08 PM

and toward the body and to the right (Figure 34–20C,D).

This bias in the physics of limb movement leads to a bias

in the preferred directions of shoulder and elbow mus-

cles, which tend to be maximally active in these same directions (Figure 34–20E). Correspondingly, the distribution of preferred directions of neurons in M1 also parallels this bias, with neurons tending to have preferred directions either away and slightly to the left or toward and to the right (Figure 34–20F). Thus, the physics of the limb dictates the pattern of muscle activity needed to generate movement, and this in turn is reflected in the pattern of neural activity in M1. The impact of limb physics on M1 activity extends to the level of muscle-related signals. The activity of some single M1 neurons, including CM cells, can be correlated

with specific components of the contraction patterns of different muscles during such diverse tasks as isometric force generation, precision pinching of objects between the thumb and index finger, and complex reaching and grasping actions (Figure 34–21). These findings highlight how M1 contributes to the specification of muscle activity patterns for motor actions, including onset times and magnitudes. Nevertheless, the final pattern of muscle activity will only be generated by the spinal motor neurons since they alone take into account the additional influence of other descending supraspinal inputs and local spinal interneuronal processes. All the studies described so far related the activity of single M1 neurons to motor output. However, voluntary motor control is implemented by the simultane-

<!-- image -->

0.5 s

neurons can be correlated with particular patterns of muscle

activity. Bursts of activity in a single corticomotoneuron during a

ous coordinated activity of many neurons throughout the motor system. Their activity is noisy, varying stochastically between repetitions of the same movement. Furthermore, their broad symmetrical movementrelated tuning curves introduce a high level of uncertainty as to what the limb should do in response to the ambiguous signal generated by each neuron. A simple computational approach was developed to extract a unique signal about each reaching movement by pooling the heterogeneous single-neuron

activity of the recorded M1 population. The activity of each neuron is represented by a vector pointing in its preferred direction; the length of the vector varies as a function of its mean discharge rate during reaches in each direction. This vector notation implies that an increase in the activity of a given M1 neuron evokes changes in activity in the spinal motor apparatus and muscles that causes the arm to move along a path corresponding to the neuron's task-related preferred direction; the strength of that single-neuron influence varies systematically with the difference between the neuron's preferred direction and the desired movement (Chapter 39, Figure 39–6). When the reach-related

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 849

reach-and-grasp movement to retrieve food pellets from a small well are correlated with bursts of contractile activity in several of its target muscles at different times during the movement. (Abbreviations: APB, abductor pollicis brevis; BR, brachioradialis; ED2, 3 , extensor digitorum 2, 3; ips, impulses per second;TLAT, lateral triceps.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Griffin et al. 2008.) activity of about 250 M1 neurons was represented

by variable-length vectors for each of the eight reach

directions and summed, the direction of the net result-

ant population vectors varied systematically with the actual reach directions (Figure 34–22A). The novel insights of this analysis were that the control of a given reach movement involves coordinated changes in the activity of M1 neurons distrib-

uted throughout the M1 arm motor map and that their pooled activity clearly distinguishes the unique identity of each of the reach actions generated by the eight different distributed patterns of population activity. Subsequent studies demonstrated that "instantaneous" population vectors extracted from the pooled activity of large populations of M1 neurons during sequential 20-ms time bins from the start to the end of movement predicted the continually changing trajectory of the

18/01/21 6:08 PM

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices

Corticomotoneuron


50 ips

0 ips


A

<!-- image -->

ent properties of movement.

A. The eight single-neuron vector clusters (thin black lines)

and the population vectors (blue arrows) represent the activity of the same population of cells during reaching movements in

eight different directions. Each single-neuron vector points in the neuron's preferred movement direction, and its length is proportional to the discharge of the neuron during that movement. The population vectors were calculated by vectorial addition of all the single-cell vectors in each cluster; dashed arrows represent the direction of movement of the arm. (Reproduced, with permission, from Georgopoulos et al. 1983.) B. Comparison of hand kinematics and kinetics and neural population activity in an isometric task and when moving a handle with a large mass. Force and neural trajectories were

generated by linking sequences of 20-ms output force vectors or neural population vectors tip-to-tail for each direction of force or movement output. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sergio et al. 2005.)

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 850

Part V / Movement arm motions 100 to 150 ms into the future while mon

-

keys made reaching movements or traced spirals on a

computer monitor. This showed that the simple vector

notation could be used to extract from the activity of populations of neurons a signal about intended motor output even on a moment-to-moment basis. These findings were anticipated by a prescient study in 1970 by Donald Humphrey and colleagues, who showed that the appropriately summed activity of three to five M1 neurons was better correlated to the temporal patterns of motor output during single-joint movements than was the signal of any of the single neurons. Subsequent studies used the population-vector decoder algorithm to provide further insight into neural processing in M1. In one study, the activity of

proximal arm–related M1 neurons was recorded while monkeys performed two tasks (Figure 34–22B). In the first task, they generated isometric force ramps in eight different spatial directions uniformly distributed at 45° intervals in a horizontal plane against a rigid handle that they held in their hand, without arm movements. A 20-ms population-vector decoder was used to extract the net directional bias of the pooled activity of many M1 neurons, and the result showed that these pooled signals varied systematically with the direction of output forces throughout the duration of the force-ramp generation, even though there were no movements. However, unlike the actual uniformly distributed directions of the forces generated by the monkey at the hand, the decoded population-vector signals were skewed toward the x-axis. This showed that the M1 activity reflected the nonlinear relationship between causal shoulder muscle torques and measured isometric forces at the hand resulting from the complex biomechanical properties of the arm (see Figure 34–20). In the second task, the monkeys made reaching movements of the arm in the same eight directions to move a heavy handle. This required an initial accelera-

tive force in the direction of movement and then a tran -sient reversal of the direction of forces to decelerate the movement of their arm and the mass as it approached the target. The decoded M1 population-vector signals in this task varied dramatically through time. They were directed initially toward the target but then transiently reversed just before the peak of hand velocity. This showed once again that the M1 activity was more closely correlated with the time course of causal forces generating the reaching movements, including their transient directional reversal, than to the uninterrupted motion of the hand toward the target. They also found that correlates of the forces to generate reaching were strongest in M1, weaker in PMd, and largely absent in PE/MIP. This indicated that, unlike M1,

18/01/21 6:08 PM

reach-related neurons in area PE/MIP generated a reli-

able signal about stable arm postures and the kinemat-

ics of arm movements independent of the underlying

causal forces and muscle activity. Finally, one study has shown that reliable signals about the time-varying activity of proximal-arm muscles during reaching movements can be extracted

from the activity of a population of simultaneously recorded M1 neurons. Another study found that the pooled activity of M1 neurons that fire selectively in connection with either shoulder or elbow movements can predict the changes in onset times and levels of contractile activity of the shoulder or elbow muscles during reaches in different directions. These studies showed that the pooled activity of many M1 neurons is a rich and reliable source of signals about different time-varying attributes of whole-arm Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


brisk, back-and-forth movements of the handle. Like

-

wise, a study demonstrated that CM cells in M1 could

be very active when monkeys generated a precision-

pinch grip of the thumb and index finger with relatively low force output, but were much less active or nearly silent when the animals generated much larger forces with a power grip involving the entire hand. Still another study has shown that some M1 neurons that respond to loads applied to the limb during postural control can lose this load sensitivity as

-soon as the monkey makes a reaching movement to another spatial target, and vice versa. That is, those neurons can reflect output forces during postural control, but reflect only kinematics during movement. This change in the cell's response occurs quite abruptly, about 150 ms before the onset of movement. Importantly, any neurons that are sensitive to loads during both posture and movement will retain the same motor field across behaviors; that is, if the neuron responds only to shoulder flexor loads during postural control, it will respond only to shoulder flexor loads during reaching. Even a simple change in the metrics of limb movement can have a large influence on M1 activity. In a study of monkeys making slow or fast reaching move-

movements. This provided an important conceptual foundation for the development of more sophisticated decoder algorithms in brain–machine interfaces that make use of the movement-related information availa ble in the simultaneous activity of many M1 neurons to allow subjects to control the actions of neuroprosthetic devices by covert modulations of M1 neuron activity without overt limb movements (Chapter 39). Primary Motor Cortical Activity Also Reflects Higher-Order Features of Movement

## Activity in M1 is not correlated only with causal forces and muscle activity. Many studies, beginning with

those of Ed Evarts, that have attempted to dissociate

kinematic from kinetic properties of motor outputs have found that the activity of some M1 neurons varies with the direction of movement but is only weakly influenced or not influenced at all by changes in output forces. Such neurons appear to preferentially signal the kinematic aspects of limb motion. Changes in behavioral task can influence the relationship between M1 activity and motor output. One study has highlighted how contextual changes in an ments in different directions from a central target to peripheral targets, proximal limb muscles displayed relatively simple scaling of their activity patterns, reflecting increased forces for faster and longer reaches. In contrast, M1 neurons displayed a broad range of changes in their activity patterns that rarely paralleled the pattern of changes observed for muscles. Activity in neurons can also correlate with higherlevel features of movement such as the nature of an upcoming motor action. This was demonstrated in a

isometric force task altered the coding of force magnitude by M1 neurons. Either the order of forces or the range of expected forces results in changes in the activity in M1. They suggested that M1 neurons could dynamically adjust their relationship to output forces to optimize precision of control as a function of the range of forces that would be encountered in a given context. Another study found that many CM neurons may discharge intensely when monkeys performed precisely controlled force tasks with low force levels but are relatively inactive when the monkeys generate powerful contractions of the same muscles to make

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 851

study in which monkeys were trained to make wrist movements to three targets in a row starting from one extreme, stopping at a central position, and then finishing at the other extreme. Visual cues instructed the monkeys when to make each movement. Because the task used a predictable sequence of wrist movements, the monkeys knew before the visual cues appeared what would be the next direction of movement. While many M1 neurons signaled the current wrist posture or the direction of each movement while they were being performed, some M1 neurons reliably signaled the next movement in the sequence before the visual cue appeared. Many subsequent studies have confirmed that M1 neurons can signal impending intended movements, although these planning-like signals are not as prominent in M1 as in premotor cortical areas. In summary, neural recording studies have revealed a diverse range of response properties within

18/01/21 6:08 PM


Part V / Movement

and across movement-related cortical areas, with

stronger correlations to causal movement kinetics in

M1 and to higher-order motor parameters in premotor

and parietal cortex. However, these experimental findings have not yet led to a single unifying hypothesis about how cortical motor circuits control voluntary movements. Part of this uncertainty may result from inadequacies in experimental task design. Representational motor-control models have interpreted these complex results as evidence of the transformations between different levels of representation

of intended movements performed by neural populations distributed across different cortical motor areas. In contrast, nonrepresentational motor-control models such as optimal feedback control argue that these same results can only be interpreted as evidence of when and where neural correlates of different motor output parameters emerge in the dynamical activity distributed across cortical motor areas but do not shed much insight into the underlying neural computations. This illustrates the experimental challenges still confronting researchers as they try to reverse engineer the cortical motor circuitry to reveal its internal computational organization. Sensory Feedback Is Transmitted Rapidly to the Primary Motor Cortex and Other Cortical Regions

## Postcentral and posterior parietal cortex provide much of the sensory information related to the position and motion of the body and the location of spatial goals that is impor-

tant in voluntary motor control, although the cerebellum is likely another important source (Chapter 37). The type of afferent information transmitted to M1 differs between the proximal and distal portions of the limb. Afferent input from cutaneous and muscle

sensory neurons is equally prevalent for hand-related neurons, reflecting the importance for both sources of sensory feedback when grasping and manipulating objects with the hand. Muscle afferents provide the major source of feedback from the proximal limb. Information from muscles is more prevalent in the rostral M1, whereas cutaneous input is more common in the caudal M1. Muscle afferent feedback to M1 is surprisingly rapid as it takes as little as 20 ms for M1 neurons to respond following a mechanical disturbance to the limb. Analogous to reaching, neural activity is broadly tuned to the direction of the mechanical disturbance. Sensory feedback supports our ability to make rapid goal-directed corrections for motor errors that arise during movement planning and execution or are

caused by unexpected disturbances of the limb. When a perturbing mechanical load is applied to the limb, the

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 852

motor system generates a multipeaked compensatory

electromyographic response, beginning with a short-

latency stretch response (20–40 ms after the perturba-

tion), followed by a long-latency response (50–100 ms) and then a so-called "voluntary" response (≥100 ms). The short latency of the initial response indicates that it is generated at the spinal level. The response is relatively small and stereotyped, and its intensity scales with the magnitude of the applied load. In contrast, motor corrections beginning in the long-latency epoch (50–100 ms) are modulated by a broad range of factors necessary to attain a behavioral goal, including the physics of the limb and environment, the presence of obstacles in the environment, the urgency of the goal, and properties of the target, including alternate goals. These context-dependent features suggest the longlatency feedback epoch is an adaptive process in which the control policy (ie, feedback gains) is adjusted based on the behavioral goal, as predicted by the optimal feedback control model. The ability of the motor system to rapidly generate these goal-directed long-latency motor responses is supported by a transcortical feedback pathway. Neural

activity across frontoparietal circuits responds rapidly to mechanical disturbances to a limb, and the pattern of activity across the cortex depends on the behavioral context. Perturbation-related activity is observed in all cortical regions beginning at approximately 20 ms after the disturbance even if the monkey is distracted by watching a movie and does not have to respond to the disturbance (Figure 34–23A,B). If the monkey is actively maintaining its hand at a spatial goal, there is an immediate increase in the neural response in parietal area PE following the disturbance, followed shortly thereafter by changes in activity in other cortical regions (Figure 34–23A,B). If the disturbance is a cue that instructs the monkey to move to another spatial target, then M1 activity reflects the need for a more vigorous response if the disturbance knocks the hand away from the target compared to knocking the hand into the target (Figure 34–23C). In contrast, perturbation-related activity in PE remains similar regardless of target location. The Primary Motor Cortex Is Dynamic and Adaptable

## One of the most remarkable properties of the brain is the adaptability of its circuitry to changes in the

environment—the capacity to learn from experience

and to store the acquired knowledge as memories. When human subjects practice a motor skill, performance improves.

18/01/21 6:08 PM

A Behavioral goals

Counter the load

<!-- image -->


No response required

2 cm

B Neuronal responses to countering

the load and no response required

<!-- image -->

Load

on

Time (ms)

sensory feedback to parietal and frontal motor cortices.

<!-- image -->

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices

Change targets

In target

<!-- image -->


Center

target

Out target

C Neuronal responses to changing targets

Load

on

Time (ms)

Population signals in each cortical region in response to pertur-

bations. Note how all cortical areas show an increase in activity

<!-- image -->

(Reproduced, with permission, from Omrani et al. 2016. Part

A photo is from the film American Pie and is reproduced, with permission, from Universal Studios. © 1999, Universal Pictures, All Rights Reserved.) A. In the experiment described here, the responses of cortical regions to mechanical loads randomly applied to the arm are compared. In the left panel, motor corrections return the hand

- to the spatial goal following the disturbance (green hand trajectory). In the middle panel, the monkey watches a movie and does not have to respond to the disturbance, leading to the hand remaining to the right following the disturbance (red hand trajectory). In the right panel, the monkey places its hand at a central start target, and one of two other targets is also presented. The disturbance applied to the limb is a cue for the monkey to move to this second target with its position being either in the direction of the disturbance (cyan "in target" trajectory) or away from the disturbance (blue "out target" trajectory). B. Left: Response of a neuron in PE and in M1 when a mechanical load was applied to the limb and the monkey had to counter the load and return the hand to a spatial target (green)
- or was not required to respond to the disturbance (red). Right:

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 853

approximately 20 ms after the applied load. Arrows denote

when activity was different when the monkey had to respond to the disturbance (green curve) as compared to not being required to respond to the disturbance (red curve). Note that PE is the first to show a difference in activity between the two conditions. Other cortical areas show changes at 40 ms or later. A2 is a subregion of S-I. (For B and C: Vertical scale bars, 20/ spikes/s); Activity between 60–250 ms (thick horizontal line) compressed for visualization purposes.) C. Left: Responses of single neurons in PE and M1 when a mechanical load was a cue and instructed the monkey to move to another target. The disturbance either pushed the hand

toward the target (cyan) or away from it (blue). Right: Population signals based on perturbation-related activity in each cortical region for the "in target" and "out target" conditions. The initial responses are similar for both "in target" and "out target" disturbances across all cortical areas, and arrows denote when there is a difference in activity between conditions. M1 is the first to display an increase in activity for the "out target" disturbance just prior to changes in muscle activity moving the hand to the spatial target.

18/01/21 6:08 PM




Part V / Movement

Motor experience can also modify the motor map.

In monkeys trained to use precise movements of the

thumb, index finger, and wrist to extract treats from

a small well, the area of the motor map in which intracortical microstimulation (ICMS) could evoke A

Pre-training

R

<!-- image -->

Finger extension

Finger exion

Wrist abduction

Other distal exion

Pre Post

Wrist

abd

B. The areas of the motor output map parallel the level of

performance (number of successful pellet retrievals) during acquisition of the motor skill and extinction (due to lack of

practice). Two areas were tested: a "dual response" area (left plot), from which any combination of finger and wrist motions could be evoked, and an area from which the specific combination of finger flexion and wrist extension could be evoked (right plot). Both areas increased as the monkey's skill improved with practice and decreased as the monkey's skill was extinguished through lack of practice. These data are from a different monkey than the one in part A but trained for same task.

et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 Society for Neuroscience.)

A. Motor maps for the hand in a monkey before and after training on retrieval of treats from a small well. Before training, areas of the motor map that generate index finger

and wrist movements occupy less than half of a monkey's motor map. After training, the area from which the trained movements can be evoked by intracortical microstimulation expands substantially. The area of the map from which one could elicit individuated movements such as finger extension and flexion has expanded considerably, while the areas controlling wrist abduction, which this monkey used less in the

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 854

movements at these joints was larger than before train-

ing (Figure 34–24). If a monkey did not practice the task

for a lengthy period, its skill level decreased, as did

the cortical area from which the trained movements could be elicited by ICMS. Similar modifications of the

Post-training





Finger ex + wrist ext area (%)

18/01/21 6:09 PM

cortical representation of practiced actions in humans

have been demonstrated by functional imaging and

transcranial magnetic stimulation.

At least some of the processes contributing to these changes to the motor map are local to M1 itself. One of the mechanisms contributing to the cortical reorganiza-

tion underlying improved reach-to-grasp performance in rodents involves changes in synaptic strength similar to long-term potentiation and depression within the local horizontal connections linking different parts of the arm motor map. It has been shown that spiketriggered ICMS could cause specific alterations to the M1 motor output map even without specific training. For instance, one study first identified two different cortical sites (A and B) that caused contractions of different muscles (muscle A and muscle B, respectively) when electrically stimulated. They then recorded the activity of a neuron at site A; whenever that neuron fired, they stimulated site B. Within a day or two of this ICMS conditioning at site B, electrical stimulation of site A was able to cause simultaneous contractions of both muscles A and B. The change likely resulted from a spike-timing dependent increase in synaptic strength that was limited to the horizontal cortical projection from site A to site B. Electromyographic responses elicited by ICMS at a third site that did not receive similar conditioning did not change, confirming that the effect was not generalized. Motor adaptation to visual or mechanical disturbances has been studied extensively in human subjects (Chapter 30). Neural-recording studies have

demonstrated that these alterations lead to changes in the activity of M1 neurons in monkeys as the animals adapt to the perturbations. For instance, when monkeys make reaching movements in a predictable external force field that pushes on the arm in a direction perpendicular to the direction of movement, their initially curved reach trajectories get straighter. As this adaptation evolves, large increases gradually arise in the activity of M1 cells whose preferred directional tuning is opposite to the applied force field. The magnitude of such adaptation-dependent changes in activity diminishes progressively as the angle between the force direction and cell preferred direction increases, following a cosine-like function. This shows that the adaptive changes were specific to the neurons that would make the greatest contribution to compensate for the external force field. Another example of selective changes in M1 activity during motor learning comes from a visuomotor learning study in which visual feedback from a

computer monitor is rotated 90° clockwise such that movements of a monkey's arm to the right result in

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 855

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


downward movement of the cursor. Initially, the monkeys

make arm movements in the original direction aimed

at the visual target location, with corrections made

online after movement onset. However, with practice, the monkeys begin to move in a new direction rotated counterclockwise to the visual target so that the cursor moves directly to the target. When training occurs for only one direction, learning generalizes poorly to other directions, suggesting that the adaptive changes occur only in neurons that evoke the adapted movement. The tuning curves of neurons with preferred directions near the learned direction were altered during training, whereas neurons with other preferred directions were not affected by the training. This confirmed that the adaptation was local, consistent with the findings of the force-field adaptation study, and explained why adaptation to the visuomotor rotation in one direction generalized poorly to other directions. Motor-error signals in the precentral cortex also play an important role in trial-by-trial motor adaptation based on feedback learning. In one study with

monkeys, an adjustable prism was used to displace the apparent location of the reach target in the environment. Visual feedback of the target and arm were blocked during the reaching movements, leading to systematic errors in touching the target. The monkeys were allowed to see visual feedback of the position of the hand relative to the target for a brief period of time at the end of movement (Figure 34–25). Activity in M1 and PMd during that brief period of visual feedback after movement reflected the direction of reach end-point errors and could be involved in adapting reaching movements to correct these errors. To test that hypothesis, ICMS was then used in M1 and PMd to simulate those error responses and showed that the monkeys began to make adaptive changes in their reaching movements to compensate for the simulated errors even though no reaching error was actually made. Some motor skills are relatively easy to learn, such as compensation for a visuomotor rotation. Others, however, are very difficult to learn. Recent stud-

ies examined this discrepancy by first measuring the activity of a population of M1 neurons as the monkey moved a cursor on a computer screen using a brain– machine interface and a neural activity decoder. This population-level mapping between M1 activity and cursor motion was then altered by changing the association between the directional tuning of each neuron and cursor motion in the decoder. When the altered decoder mapping retained the normal co-modulation structure of neural activity, as would be the case for instance if the mapping between the activity of all

18/01/21 6:09 PM


Part V / Movement

Figure 34–25 (right) Error signals in the primary motor

cortex drive adaptation.  After a movement is complete,

M1 activity reflects the error between the spatial target and

final hand position. (Reproduced, with permission, from Inoue, Uchimura, and Kitazawa 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc.) A. Monkeys made reaching movements to spatial targets on a touch screen. On each trial, adjustable prism goggles shifted the viewed position of the spatial target by a variable

- amount during the movement, while a shutter blocked vision of the monkey's hand and the target. Feedback of the final hand position was only provided for 300 ms after contact with the touch screen at the end of movement. B. Top: Discharge response of a typical M1 neuron. Raster plots and spike-timing histograms are aligned with the initial screen contact (touch).
1. Distribution of reach endpoint errors (black dots) where the origin represents the center of the target. Diameters of green circles denote the firing rate of the neuron during
- each movement (green bar in B); the firing rates were unrelated to the subsequent endpoint error. The numbers in each quadrant indicate the summed spike activity during movements that ended in the corresponding quadrant; they are all nearly equal. 2. Same as in part B except purple circles denote firing rate 100 to 200 ms after movement while the monkey can see its hand while touching the screen (purple bar in part B). The
- circles and spike counts show that the firing rate is greatest for endpoint errors down and to the left relative to the position of the target (0,0), revealing that that the neural activity during this postmovement period is strongly modulated by visual feedback of reach endpoint error.

neurons and cursor motions was rotated clockwise A Experiment Start trial Target appears Reach Touch Shutter close

<!-- image -->

by 45°, the monkeys showed significant adaptation interfaces and neural decoders to explore how single

to the perturbation within a few hundred trials dur-

ing a single recording session. In contrast, when the perturbation required the monkeys to learn a more complex "unnatural" remapping, for instance, random clockwise and counterclockwise rotations of the apparent directional tuning of neurons by different amounts, the monkeys showed little ability to recover proficient cursor control over several hundred trials in a single recording session. Importantly, another study found that monkeys could eventually master an "unnatural" change in an M1 neural activity decoder mapping if they could practice with the same altered decoder over several days, indicating that they could learn a new neural co-modulation structure if allowed enough experience with it. These studies reinforce how neural circuits in these cortical motor regions are critical for motor skill learning.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 856

neurons and neural populations contribute to motor

skill learning. This technology promises to be an increasingly important research tool for developing new insights into the neural mechanisms of voluntary motor control and motor skill learning (Chapter 39). Highlights

1. Voluntary motor behavior implements an individ-

ual's intentional choice or decision to move within,

and to interact physically with objects in, the envi-

- ronment. A hallmark of human motor action is the breadth of skills we possess and, when highly practiced, the ease and automaticity of these actions. 2. Voluntary motor control has long been separated into two stages—planning and execution—that

18/01/21 6:09 PM


2 After movement, target visible



0 20 40
Part V / Movement

Figure 34–25 (right) Error signals in the primary motor

cortex drive adaptation.  After a movement is complete,

M1 activity reflects the error between the spatial target and

final hand position. (Reproduced, with permission, from Inoue, Uchimura, and Kitazawa 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc.) A. Monkeys made reaching movements to spatial targets on a touch screen. On each trial, adjustable prism goggles shifted the viewed position of the spatial target by a variable

- amount during the movement, while a shutter blocked vision of the monkey's hand and the target. Feedback of the final hand position was only provided for 300 ms after contact with the touch screen at the end of movement. B. Top: Discharge response of a typical M1 neuron. Raster plots and spike-timing histograms are aligned with the initial screen contact (touch).
1. Distribution of reach endpoint errors (black dots) where the origin represents the center of the target. Diameters of green circles denote the firing rate of the neuron during
- each movement (green bar in B); the firing rates were unrelated to the subsequent endpoint error. The numbers in each quadrant indicate the summed spike activity during movements that ended in the corresponding quadrant; they are all nearly equal. 2. Same as in part B except purple circles denote firing rate 100 to 200 ms after movement while the monkey can see its hand while touching the screen (purple bar in part B). The
- circles and spike counts show that the firing rate is greatest for endpoint errors down and to the left relative to the position of the target (0,0), revealing that that the neural activity during this postmovement period is strongly modulated by visual feedback of reach endpoint error.

neurons and cursor motions was rotated clockwise A Experiment Start trial Target appears Reach Touch Shutter close

<!-- image -->

by 45°, the monkeys showed significant adaptation interfaces and neural decoders to explore how single

to the perturbation within a few hundred trials dur-

ing a single recording session. In contrast, when the perturbation required the monkeys to learn a more complex "unnatural" remapping, for instance, random clockwise and counterclockwise rotations of the apparent directional tuning of neurons by different amounts, the monkeys showed little ability to recover proficient cursor control over several hundred trials in a single recording session. Importantly, another study found that monkeys could eventually master an "unnatural" change in an M1 neural activity decoder mapping if they could practice with the same altered decoder over several days, indicating that they could learn a new neural co-modulation structure if allowed enough experience with it. These studies reinforce how neural circuits in these cortical motor regions are critical for motor skill learning.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 856

neurons and neural populations contribute to motor

skill learning. This technology promises to be an increasingly important research tool for developing new insights into the neural mechanisms of voluntary motor control and motor skill learning (Chapter 39). Highlights

1. Voluntary motor behavior implements an individ-

ual's intentional choice or decision to move within,

and to interact physically with objects in, the envi-

- ronment. A hallmark of human motor action is the breadth of skills we possess and, when highly practiced, the ease and automaticity of these actions. 2. Voluntary motor control has long been separated into two stages—planning and execution—that

18/01/21 6:09 PM


2 After movement, target visible



0 20 40

can be dissociated in time. Neural recording

studies have found correlates of these two stages

differentially distributed across many movement-

- related cortical areas. 3. The overall computational problem that the motor system must resolve to control voluntary movement is to convert sensory information
- about the current state of the world and the body into plans for action and ultimately into patterns of muscle activity that generate the causal forces required to execute the desired movement(s), while avoiding or correcting for errors. 4. Representational models of voluntary motor control such as the sensorimotor coordinate transfor mation hypothesis assume that the motor system

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


to the orientation of the eye, head, or arm) varies

across subregions. The presence of multiple rep-

resentations provides a rich basis for defining the

- movement-relevant properties and the locations of objects in the world and relative to the body that can be used to select and guide movement. 8. Premotor and prefrontal cortices play a prominent role in task selection and motor planning. The dorsal and ventral premotor regions are often
- -implicated when external sensory information plays a dominant role in selecting motor actions. In contrast, more medial premotor regions, such as the supplementary and cingulate motor areas, may play a more dominant role when internal desires are more critical in selecting and initiating a motor action. However, this dichotomy is not absolute, and multiple premotor and prefrontal cortical areas all contribute to the control of voluntary behavior in a broad range of contexts and conditions. 9. Primary motor cortex in primates has a representation of the entire body along its mediolateral axis, with larger cortical territories associated
- directly plans and controls specific features or parameters of intended movements. Single neurons and neural populations express those parameters in their activity and perform definable computations to effect the transformations between the controlled movement parameters in corresponding coordinate frameworks. 5. Dynamical systems models of voluntary motor control, in contrast, assume that motor circuits find empirical solutions for the computations
- underlying the planning and execution of movements by evolutionary and individual adaptive processes. One recent theory, optimal feedback control, proposes that planning and execution of voluntary movements involve three functional processes, namely, state estimation, task selection, and a control policy. Single neurons and neural populations contribute to voluntary motor control by participating in the computations underlying these three processes. 6. Distributed frontoparietal circuits in cerebral cortex play a pivotal role in voluntary control. There are substantial reciprocal axonal interconnections
- with the hand and face relative to other body parts. This cortical region also provides a large component of the corticospinal tract and has projections to both interneurons and alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord. 10. Neural activity that reflects the causal forces and the spatiotemporal features of muscle activity necessary to move the limb is particularly
- between frontal and parietal cortical regions, partially segregated based on body part (eg, hand, arm, eye). Frontal motor and parietal cortical regions both directly influence spinal processing through the corticospinal tract and indirectly through brain stem descending pathways. 7. Posterior parietal cortex plays a prominent role in identifying potential goals and objects in the environment, state estimation of the body, and sensory
- guidance of motor actions. Important sources of sensory signals are transmitted from visual cortex through the dorsal visual pathway and from primary somatosensory cortex. Behavioral goals and objects are represented in many parietal subregions, but how they are represented (relative

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 857

- prominent in the primary motor cortex and can be rapidly altered to correct movement errors or to compensate for displacements of the limb away from the desired movement if the limb is perturbed. However, neural activity in primary motor cortex can also show more complex properties, reflecting changes based on the behavioral context, performance goals and constraints, and features such as movement kinematics. These properties of primary motor cortex activity may reflect the formation of a task-specific control policy within the motor system. 11. Although parietal, premotor, and primary motor cortical regions play prominent roles in state estimation, motor planning, and motor execution,
- respectively, they are not uniquely responsible for any one aspect; they are instead distributed to some degree across most or all of these cortical regions. 12. The cortical motor system is adaptive and can undergo changes in its functional architecture to adapt to long-term changes in the physical

18/01/21 6:09 PM


13.

Part V / Movement

properties of the world and the body, as well as

acquire, retain, and recall new motor skills.

New technologies such as large-scale multi-

- neuron recording and imaging methods, enhanced multi-neuron activity decoding algo-
- rithms, and optogenetic control of the activity of specific neural populations will lead to deeper insights into the functional architecture of cortical motor circuits.

Stephen H. Scott

Selected Reading

Battaglia-Mayer A, Babicola L, Satta E. 2016. Parieto-frontal

gradients and domains underlying eye and hand opera-

tions in the action space. Neuroscience 334:76–92.

- Cisek P, Kalaska JF. 2010. Neural mechanisms for interacting with a world full of action choices. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:269–298.
- Dum RP, Strick PL. 2002. Motor areas in the frontal lobe of the primate. Physiol Behav 77:677–682. Hikosaka O, Isoda M. 2010. Switching from automatic to
- controlled behaviour: cortico-basal ganglia mechanism. Trends Cogn Sci 14:154–161.
- Lemon RN. 2008 Descending pathways in motor control. Ann Rev Neurosci 31:195–218. Passingham RE, Bengtsson SL, Lau HC. 2010. Medial frontal
- cortex: from self-generated action to reflection on one's own performance. Trends Cogn Sci 14:16–21.
- Scott SH. 2004. Optimal feedback control and the neural basis of volitional motor control. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:532–546.
- References Batista AP, Buneo CA, Snyder LH, Andersen RA. 1999. Reach

plans in eye-centered coordinates. Science 285:257–260.

Cheney PD, Fetz EE, Palmer SS. 1985. Patterns of facilita-

- tion and suppression of antagonist forelimb muscles from motor cortex sites in the awake monkey. J Neurophysiol
- 53:805–820. Cherian A, Krucoff MO, Miller LE. 2011. Motor cortical prediction of EMG: evidence that a kinetic brain-machine interface may be robust across altered movement dynam-
- ics. J Neurophysiol 106:564–575. Churchland MM, Shenoy KV. 2006. Temporal complexity and heterogeneity of single-neuron activity in premotor and motor cortex. J Neurophysiol 97:4235–4257.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 858

Cisek P, Crammond DJ, Kalaska JF. 2003. Neural activity in

primary motor and dorsal premotor cortex in reaching tasks

with the contralateral versus ipsilateral arm. J Neurophysiol

- 89:922–942. Cisek P, Kalaska JF. 2004. Neural correlates of mental rehearsal in dorsal premotor cortex. Nature 431:993–996. Crammond DJ, Kalaska JF. 2000. Prior information in motor
- and premotor cortex: activity in the delay period and effect on pre-movement activity. J Neurophysiol 84:986–1005.
- Duhamel JR, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1998. Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque: congruent visual and somatic response properties. J Neurophysiol 79:126–136.
- Evarts EV. 1968. Relation of pyramidal tract activity to force exerted during voluntary movement. J Neurophysiol 31:14–27.
- John F. Kalaska Evarts E, Tanji J. 1976. Reflex and intended responses in motor cortex pyramidal tract neurons of monkey. J Neurophysiol 39:1069–1080.
- Fetz EE, Cheney PD. 1980. Postspike facilitation of forelimb muscle activity by primate corticomotoneuronal cells. J Neurophysiol 44:751–772.
- Ganguly K, Carmena JM. 2009. Emergence of a stable cortical map for neuroprosthetic control. PLoS Biol. 7:e1000153. Georgopoulos AP, Caminiti R, Kalaska JF, Massey JT. 1983.
- Spatial coding of movement: a hypothesis concerning the coding of movement direction by motor cortical popula-
- tions. Exp Brain Res 49(Suppl 7):327–336. Georgopoulos AP, Kalaska, JF, Caminiti R, Massey JT. 1982. On the relations between the direction of two-dimensional arm movements and cell discharge in primate motor cortex.
- J Neurosci 2:1527–1537. Georgopoulos AP, Kettner RE, Schwartz AB. 1988. Primate motor cortex and free arm movements to visual tar -gets in three-dimensional space. II. Coding of the direc-
- tion of movement by a neuronal population. J Neurosci 8:2928–2937. Goodale MA, Milner AD. 1992. Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends Neurosci 15:20–25. Griffin DM, Hudson HM, Belhaj-Saïf A, McKiernan BJ,
- Cheney PD. 2008. Do corticomotoneuronal cells predict target muscle EMG activity? J Neurophysiol 99:1169–1186.
- Heming EA, Lillicrap TP, Omrani M, Herter TM, Pruszynski JA, Scott SH. 2016. Primary motor cortex neurons classified in a postural task predict muscle activation patterns
- in a reaching task. J Neurophysiol 115:2021–2032. Hepp-Reymond MC, Kirkpatrick-Tanner M, Gabernet L, Qi Hx, Weber B. 1999. Context-dependent force coding in motor and premotor cortical areas. Exp Brain Res
- 128:123–133. Humphrey DR, Tanji J. 1991. What features of voluntary motor control are encoded in the neuronal discharge of different cortical areas? In: DR Humphrey, H-J Freund
- (eds). Motor Control: Concepts and Issues, pp 413–443. New York: Wiley. Hwang EJ, Bailey PM, Andersen RA. 2013. Volitional control of neural activity relies on the natural motor repertoire. Curr Biol 23:353–361.

18/01/21 6:09 PM

Inoue M, Uchimura M, Kitazawa S. 2016. Error signals in

motor cortices drive adaptation in reaching. Neuron

90:1114–1126.

- Kalaska JF, Cohen DA, Hyde ML, Prud'Homme M. 1989. A comparison of movement direction-related versus load direction-related activity in primate motor cortex, using
- a two-dimensional reaching task. J Neurosci 9:2080–2102. Kaufman MT, Churchland MM, Ryu SI, Shenoy KV. 2014. Cortical activity in the null space: permitting preparation without movement. Nat Neurosci 17:440–448.
- Klaes C, Westendorff S, Chakrabarti S, Gail A. 2011. Choosing goals, not rules: deciding among rule-based action plans. Neuron 70:536–548.
- Kurtzer I, Herter TM, Scott SH. 2005. Random change in cortical load representation suggests distinct control of posture and movement. Nat Neurosci 8:498–504.
- Maravita A, Iriki A. 2004. Tools for the body (schema). Trends Cogn Sci 8:79–86. Moritz CT, Perlmutter SI, Fetz EE. 2008. Direct control of par-
- alysed muscles by cortical neurons. Nature 456:639–642. Muir RB, Lemon RN. 1983. Corticospinal neurons with a spe-
- cial role in precision grip. Brain Res 261:312–316. Murata A, Wen W, Asama H. 2016. The body and objects
- represented in the ventral stream of the parieto-premotor network. Neurosci Res 104:4–15.
- Nachev P, Kennard C, Husain M. 2008. Functional role of the supplementary and pre-supplementary motor areas. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:856–869.
- Nudo RJ, Milliken GW, Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM. 1996. Use-dependent alterations of movement representations in primary motor cortex of adult squirrel monkeys.
- J Neurosci 16:785–807. Omrani M, Murnaghan CD, Pruszynski JA, Scott SH. 2016. Distributed task-specific processing of somatosensory feedback for voluntary motor control. eLife 5:e13141.
- Park MC, Belhaj-Saïf A, Gordon M, Cheney PD. 2001. Consistent features in the forelimb representation of primary motor cortex in rhesus macaques. J Neurosci
- 21:2784–2792. Paz R, Vaadia E. 2004. Learning-induced improvement in encoding and decoding of specific movement directions by neurons in the primary motor cortex. PLoS Biol 2:E45.
- Pruszynski JA, Kurtzer I, Nashed JY, Omrani M, Brouwer B, Scott SH. 2011. Primary motor cortex underlies multijoint integration for fast feedback control. Nature 478:
- 387–390. Rathelot JA, Strick PL. 2006. Muscle representation in the macaque motor cortex: an anatomical perspective. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:8257–8262.
- Rizzolatti G, Camarda R, Fogassi L, Gentilucci M, Luppino G, Matelli M. 1988. Functional organization of inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey. II. Area F5 and the control
- of distal movement. Exp Brain Res 71:491–507.

Kandel-Ch34\_0815-0859.indd 859

Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices


Rizzolatti G, Fadiga L, Gallese V, Fogassi L. 1996. Premotor

cortex and the recognition of motor actions. Cogn Brain

Res 3:131–141.

- Romo R, Hernández A, Zainos A. 2004. Neuronal correlates of a perceptual decision in ventral premotor cortex. Neuron 41:165–173.
- Rozzi S, Calzavara R, Belmalih A, et al. 2006. Cortical connections of the inferior parietal cortical convexity of the macaque monkey. Cereb Cortex 16:1389–1417.
- Sadtler PT, Quick KM, Golub MD, et al. 2014. Neural constraints on learning. Nature 512:423–426. Schaffelhofer S, Scherberger H. 2016. Object vision to hand
- action in macaque parietal, premotor, and motor cortices. eLife 5:e15278.
- Schwartz AB. 1994. Direct cortical representation of drawing. Science 265:540–542. Scott SH, Cluff T, Lowrey CR, Takei T. 2015. Feedback con-
- trol during voluntary motor actions. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33:85–94.
- Scott SH, Gribble P, Graham K, Cabel DW. 2001. Dissociation between hand motion and population vectors from neural activity in motor cortex. Nature 413:161–165.
- Sergio LE, Hamel-Pâquet C, Kalaska JF. 2005. Motor cortex neural correlates of output kinematics and kinetics during isometric-force and arm-reaching tasks. J Neurophysiol
- 94:2353–2378. Sergio LE, Kalaska JF. 2003. Systematic changes in motor cortex cell activity with arm posture during directional isometric force generation. J Neurophysiol 89:212–228.
- Shenoy KV, Sahani M, Churchland M. 2013. Cortical control of arm movements: a dynamical systems perspective. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:337–359.
- Shima K, Tanji J. 1998. Role of cingulate motor area cells in voluntary movement selection based on reward. Science 282:1335–1338.
- Shinoda Y, Yokota J, Futami T. 1981. Divergent projections of individual corticospinal axons to motoneurons of multiple muscles in the monkey. Neurosci Lett 23:7–12.
- Sommer MA, Wurtz RH. 2008. Brain circuits for the internal monitoring of movements. Ann Rev Neurosci 31:317–338. Strick PL. 1983. The influence of motor preparation on the
- response of cerebellar neurons to limb displacements. J Neurosci 3:2007–2020.
- Tanji J. 2001. Sequential organization of multiple movements: involvement of cortical motor areas. Ann Rev Neurosci 24:631–651.
- Thach WT. 1978. Correlation of neural discharge with pattern and force of muscular activity, joint position, and direction of intended next arm movement in motor cortex and
- cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 41:654–676. Wallis JD, Miller EK. 2003. From rule to response: neuronal processes in the premotor and prefrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol 90:1790–1806.

18/01/21 6:09 PM


The Control of Gaze

The Eye Is Moved by the Six Extraocular Muscles

Eye Movements Rotate the Eye in the Orbit

The Six Extraocular Muscles Form Three Agonist–

## Antagonist Pairs

Movements of the Two Eyes Are Coordinated

The Extraocular Muscles Are Controlled by Three Cranial Nerves

Six Neuronal Control Systems Keep the Eyes on Target An Active Fixation System Holds the Fovea on a

Stationary Target

## The Saccadic System Points the Fovea Toward

Objects of Interest The Motor Circuits for Saccades Lie in the Brain Stem

Horizontal Saccades Are Generated in the Pontine Reticular Formation

## Vertical Saccades Are Generated in the Mesencephalic

Reticular Formation Brain Stem Lesions Result in Characteristic Deficits in

Eye Movements Saccades Are Controlled by the Cerebral Cortex Through the

Superior Colliculus The Superior Colliculus Integrates Visual and Motor

## Information into Oculomotor Signals for the Brain Stem The Rostral Superior Colliculus Facilitates Visual Fixation

The Basal Ganglia and Two Regions of Cerebral Cortex Control the Superior Colliculus

The Control of Saccades Can Be Modified by Experience

Some Rapid Gaze Shifts Require Coordinated Head and Eye Movements

The Smooth-Pursuit System Keeps Moving Targets on the Fovea The Vergence System Aligns the Eyes to Look at Targets at Different Depths

Highlights

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 860


n preceding chapters, we learned about the motor

systems that control the movements of the body in

space. In this and the next chapter, we consider the

motor systems that control our gaze, balance, and posture as we move through the world around us. In examining these motor systems, we will focus on three biological challenges that these systems resolve: How do we visually explore our environment quickly and efficiently? How do we compensate for planned and unplanned movements of the head? How do we stay upright? In this chapter, we describe the oculomotor system and how it uses visual information to guide eye movements. It is one of the simplest motor systems,

requiring the coordination of only the 12 evolutionarily old muscles that move the two eyes. In humans and other primates, the primary objective of the oculomotor system is to control the position of the fovea, the central point in the retina that has the highest density of photoreceptors and thus the sharpest vision. The fovea is less than 1 mm in diameter and covers less than 1% of the visual field. When we want to examine an object, we must move its image onto the fovea (Chapter 22). The Eye Is Moved by the Six Extraocular Muscles

Eye Movements Rotate the Eye in the Orbit

## To a good approximation, the eye is a sphere that sits

## in a socket, the orbit. Eye movements are simply rotations of the eye in the orbit. The eye's orientation can

be defined by three axes of rotation—horizontal, vertical, and torsional—that intersect at the center of the eyeball, and eye movements are described as rotations

20/01/21 11:19 AM

around these axes. Horizontal and vertical eye move-

ments change the line of sight by redirecting the

fovea; torsional eye movements rotate the eye around

the line of sight but do not change where the eyes are looking. Horizontal rotation of the eye away from the nose is called abduction, and rotation toward the nose is adduction (Figure 35–1A). Vertical movements are referred

to as elevation (upward rotation) and depression (downward rotation). Finally, torsional movements include A Eye movements

Intorsion

<!-- image -->

Trochlea

Lateral rectus

Superior rectus Inferior Adduction Levator (cut)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Optic

nerve

Inferior rectus

Inferior oblique

A. View of the left eye and the three dimensions of eye

movement. B. 1. Lateral view of the left eye with the orbital wall cut away. Each

rectus muscle inserts in front of the equator of the globe so that contraction rotates the cornea toward the muscle. Conversely, the

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 861

oblique

Medial

rectus

Superior

oblique

Superior

rectus

Levator

(cut)

oblique muscles insert behind the equator, and contraction rotates

the cornea away from the insertion. The superior oblique tendon

passes through the trochlea, a bony pulley on the nasal side of the

orbit, before it inserts on the globe. The levator muscle of the upper eyelid raises the lid. 2. Superior view of the left eye with the roof of the orbit and the levator muscle cut away. The superior rectus passes over the superior oblique and inserts in front of it on the globe.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze


intorsion (rotation of the top of the cornea toward the

nose) and extorsion (rotation away from the nose).

Most eye movements are conjugate; that is, both

eyes move in the same direction. These eye movements are called version movements. For example, during

gaze to the right, the right eye abducts and the left eye adducts. Similarly, if the right eye extorts, the left eye intorts. When you change your gaze from far to near, the eyes move in opposite directions—both eyes adduct. These movements are called vergence movements.

2 Superior view


Part V / Movement

The Six Extraocular Muscles Form Three

Agonist–Antagonist Pairs

## Each eye is rotated by six extraocular muscles arranged in three agonist–antagonist pairs (Figure 35–1B). The four rectus muscles (lateral, medial, superior, and infe-

rior) share a common origin, the annulus of Zinn, at the apex of the orbit. They insert on the surface of the eye, or sclera, anterior to the center of the eye, so the superior rectus elevates the eye and the inferior rectus depresses it. The origin of the inferior oblique muscle is on the medial wall of the orbit; the superior oblique muscle's tendon passes through the trochlea, or pulley, before inserting on the globe, so that its effective origin is also on the anteromedial wall of the orbit. The oblique muscles insert posterior to the center of the eye, so the superior oblique depresses the eye and the inferior oblique elevates it. Each muscle has a dual insertion. The part of the muscle farthest from the eye inserts on a soft-tissue pulley through which the rest of the muscle passes on

its way to the eye. When the extraocular muscles contract, they not only rotate the eye but also change their pulling directions as a result of these pulleys. The actions of the extraocular muscles are deter -mined by their geometry and by the position of the eye in the orbit. The medial and lateral recti rotate the A In adduction, the superior oblique depresses the eye B In abduction, the superior oblique intorts the eye Nasal side A. When the eye is adducted (looking toward the nose), con-

<!-- image -->

traction of the superior oblique depresses the eye. B. When the eye is abducted (looking away from the nose), contraction of the superior oblique intorts the eye.

eye horizontally; the medial rectus adducts, whereas the lateral rectus abducts. The superior and inferior recti and the obliques rotate the eye both vertically and torsionally. The superior rectus and inferior oblique elevate the eye, and the inferior rectus and superior oblique depress it. The superior rectus and superior oblique intort the eye, whereas the inferior rectus and inferior oblique extort it. The superior and inferior recti and the obliques are often called the cyclovertical muscles because they produce both vertical and torsional eye rotation.

The relative amounts of each rotation depend on eye position. The superior and inferior recti exert their maximal vertical action when the eye is abducted, that is, when the line of sight is parallel to the muscles' pulling directions, while the oblique muscles exert their maximal vertical action when the eye is adducted (Figure 35–2). Movements of the Two Eyes Are Coordinated

Humans and other frontal-eyed animals have binocu-

## lar vision—the fields of vision of the two eyes overlap. This facilitates stereopsis, the ability to perceive

a visual scene in three dimensions, as well as depth perception. At the same time, binocular vision requires

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 862

precise coordination of the movements of the two eyes

so that both foveae are always directed at the target

of interest. For most eye movements, both eyes must

move by the same amount and in the same direction. This is accomplished, in large part, through the pairing of eye muscles in the two eyes. Just as each eye muscle is paired with its antagonist in the same orbit (eg, the medial and lateral recti), it is also paired with the muscle that moves the opposite eye

in the same direction. For example, coupling of the left lateral rectus and right medial rectus moves both eyes to the left during a leftward saccade. The orientations of the vertical muscles are such that each pair consists of one rectus muscle and one oblique muscle. For example, the left superior rectus and the right inferior oblique both move the eyes upward in left gaze, while the right inferior rectus and the left superior oblique both move the eyes downward in right gaze (Table 35–1). The Extraocular Muscles Are Controlled by Three Cranial Nerves

## The extraocular muscles are innervated by groups of motor neurons whose cell bodies are clustered in the

three oculomotor nuclei in the brain stem (Figure 35–3).

20/01/21 11:20 AM

Table 35–1 Vertical Muscle Action in Adduction and

Abduction Action in abduction Depression Posterior commissure Superior colliculus Inferior colliculus

Muscle Action in adduction

| Superior rectus  Intorsion  Elevation  Inferior rectus  Extorsion  Superior oblique  Depression  Intorsion  Inferior oblique  Elevation  Extorsion   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

3 mm

nuclei are shown in a parasagittal section through the thala-

<!-- image -->

mus, pons, midbrain, and cerebellum of a rhesus monkey. The

oculomotor nucleus (cranial nerve III) lies in the midbrain at the level of the mesencephalic reticular formation; the trochlear nucleus (nerve IV) is slightly caudal; and the abducens nucleus (nerve VI) lies in the pons at the level of the paramedian pontine reticular formation, adjacent to the fasciculus of the facial nerve (VII). Compare with Figure 40–5. (Abbreviations: iC, interstitial nucleus of Cajal; iMLF, interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus; nD, nucleus of Darkshevich; VN, vestibular nuclei.) (Adapted from Henn, Hepp, and Büttner-Ennever 1982.)

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 863

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze


The lateral rectus is innervated by the abducens nerve

(cranial nerve VI), whose nucleus lies in the pons in the

floor of the fourth ventricle. The superior oblique muscle

is innervated by the trochlear nerve (cranial nerve IV), whose nucleus is located in the contralateral midbrain at the level of the inferior colliculus. (The trochlear nerve gets its name from the trochlea, the bony pulley through which the superior oblique muscle travels.) All the other extraocular muscles—the medial, inferior, and superior recti, and the inferior oblique— are innervated by the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III),

whose nucleus lies in the midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus. Superior rectus axons cross the midline and join the contralateral oculomotor nerve. Thus, both superior rectus and superior oblique motor neurons innervate their respective muscles on the opposite side. The oculomotor nerve also contains fibers that innervate the levator muscle of the upper eyelid. Cell bodies of axons innervating both eyelids are located in the central caudal nucleus, a single midline structure within the oculomotor complex. Finally, traveling with the oculomotor nerve are parasympathetic fibers that innervate the iris sphincter muscle, which constricts the pupil, and the ciliary muscles that adjust the curvature of the lens to focus the eye during vergence movements from far to near, the process of accomodation. The pupil and eyelid also have sympathetic innervation, which originates in the intermediolateral cell column of the ipsilateral upper thoracic spinal cord.

Fibers of these neurons synapse on cells in the superior cervical ganglion in the upper neck. Axons of these postganglionic cells travel along the carotid artery to the cavernous sinus and then into the orbit. Sympathetic pupillary fibers innervate the iris dilator muscle, causing the pupil to dilate and thus providing the pupillary component of the so-called "fight or flight" response. Sympathetic fibers also innervate Müller's muscle, a secondary elevator of the upper eyelid. The sympathetic control of pupillary dilatation and lid elevation is responsible for the "wide-eyed" look of excitement and sympathetic overload. The best way to understand the actions of the extraocular muscles is to consider the eye movements that remain after a lesion of a specific nerve (Box 35–1).

The force generated by an extraocular muscle is determined both by the firing rate of the motor neurons and the number of motor units recruited. Like the

motor units for skeletal muscle (Chapter 31), eye motor units are recruited in a fixed sequence. For example, as the eye moves laterally, the number of active abducens neurons and their individual firing rates both increase, thereby increasing the strength of lateral rectus contraction.

20/01/21 11:20 AM


Part V / Movement

Box 35–1 Extraocular Muscle or Nerve Lesions

## Patients with lesions of the extraocular muscles or their

nerves complain of double vision (diplopia) because the

images of the object of gaze no longer fall on the corre-

sponding retinal locations in both eyes. Lesions of each nerve produce characteristic symptoms that depend on which extraocular muscles are affected. In general, double vision increases when the patient tries to look in the direction of the weak muscle. Abducens Nerve A lesion of the abducens nerve (VI) causes weakness of

the lateral rectus. When the lesion is complete, the eye

cannot abduct beyond the midline, such that a hori-

zontal diplopia increases when the subject looks in the direction of the affected eye. Trochlear Nerve A left trochlear nerve (IV) lesion affects both torsional

and vertical eye movements by weakening the superior

oblique muscle (Figure 35–4). Vertical misalignment in

superior oblique paresis is also affected by the position of the head. A tilt to one side, such that the ear moves toward the shoulder, induces a small torsion of the eye in the opposite direction, known as ocular counter-roll. For example, when the head tilts to the left, the left eye is ordinarily intorted by the left superior rectus and left superior oblique, while the right eye is extorted by the right inferior rectus and right inferior oblique. In the left eye, the elevation action of the superior rectus is canceled by the depression action of the superior oblique, so the eye only rotates about the line of sight. When the head tilts to the right, the inferior oblique and inferior rectus extort the left eye and the superior oblique and the superior rectus relax. With paresis of the left superior oblique, the elevating action of the superior rectus is unopposed when the head tilts to the left such that the left eye moves further

upward. In contrast, tilting the head to the right relaxes

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 864

the superior rectus and superior oblique (Figure 35–4D).

Thus, patients with trochlear nerve lesions often prefer

to keep their heads tilted away from the affected eye

because this reduces the misalignment and can eliminate diplopia. Oculomotor Nerve A lesion of the oculomotor nerve (III) has complex

effects because this nerve innervates multiple muscles.

A complete lesion spares only the lateral rectus and

superior oblique muscles. Thus, the paretic eye is typically deviated downward and abducted at rest and cannot move medially or upward. Downward movement is also affected because the inferior rectus muscle is weak; because the eye is abducted, the primary action of the intact superior oblique is intorsion rather than depression. Because the fibers that control lid elevation, accommodation, and pupillary constriction travel in the oculomotor nerve, damage to this nerve also results in drooping

of the eyelid (ptosis), blurred vision for near objects, and pupillary dilation (mydriasis). Although sympathetic innervation is still intact with an oculomotor nerve lesion, the ptosis is essentially complete, since Müller's muscle contributes less to elevation of the upper eyelid than does the levator muscle of the upper eyelid. Sympathetic Oculomotor Nerves Sympathetic fibers innervating the eye arise from the

thoracic spinal cord, traverse the apex of the lung, and

## ascend to the eye on the outside of the carotid artery.

Interruption of the sympathetic pathways to the eye leads to Horner syndrome, which includes a partial ipsilateral ptosis owing to weakness of Müller's muscle and a relative constriction (miosis) of the ipsilateral pupil. The pupillary asymmetry is most pronounced in low light because the normal pupil is able to dilate but the pupil affected by Horner syndrome is not.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

A

<!-- image -->

inserts behind the equator of the eye. It depresses the eye

when it is adducted and intorts the eye when it is abducted. A. Hypertropia, a permanent upward deviation of the eye, can be seen when a patient is looking straight ahead. The right eye is in the center of the orbit, but the affected left

eye is slightly above the right eye. B. The hypertropia is worse when the eye is adducted because the unopposed inferior oblique pushes the eye higher (left). The condition is improved when the eye is

abducted (right) because the superior oblique contributes less to depression than to intorsion.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 865

Trochlear

nerve

C. When the patient looks to the right, the hypertropia is

worse on downward gaze (left) than it is on upward gaze

(right).

D. The hypertropia is improved by head tilt to the right (left) and worsened by tilt to the left (right). The ocular counterrolling reflex induces intorsion of the left eye on leftward

head tilt and extorsion of the eye on rightward head tilt (Chapter 27). With leftward head tilt, intorsion requires increased activity of the superior rectus, whose elevating activity is unopposed by the weak superior oblique, causing increased hypertropia. With rightward head tilt and extorsion of the left eye, the unopposed superior rectus muscle is less active, and the hypertropia decreases.

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze

Superior

oblique


20/01/21 11:20 AM
A

<!-- image -->

inserts behind the equator of the eye. It depresses the eye

when it is adducted and intorts the eye when it is abducted. A. Hypertropia, a permanent upward deviation of the eye, can be seen when a patient is looking straight ahead. The right eye is in the center of the orbit, but the affected left

eye is slightly above the right eye. B. The hypertropia is worse when the eye is adducted because the unopposed inferior oblique pushes the eye higher (left). The condition is improved when the eye is

abducted (right) because the superior oblique contributes less to depression than to intorsion.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 865

Trochlear

nerve

C. When the patient looks to the right, the hypertropia is

worse on downward gaze (left) than it is on upward gaze

(right).

D. The hypertropia is improved by head tilt to the right (left) and worsened by tilt to the left (right). The ocular counterrolling reflex induces intorsion of the left eye on leftward

head tilt and extorsion of the eye on rightward head tilt (Chapter 27). With leftward head tilt, intorsion requires increased activity of the superior rectus, whose elevating activity is unopposed by the weak superior oblique, causing increased hypertropia. With rightward head tilt and extorsion of the left eye, the unopposed superior rectus muscle is less active, and the hypertropia decreases.

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze

Superior

oblique


20/01/21 11:20 AM


Part V / Movement

Six Neuronal Control Systems Keep

the Eyes on Target

## The oculomotor nuclei are the final common targets for all types of eye movements generated by higher

brain networks. Hermann Helmholtz and other 19th-

century psychophysicists appreciated that analysis of eye movements was essential for understanding visual perception, but they assumed that all eye movements were smooth. In 1890, Edwin Landott discovered that during reading the eyes do not move smoothly along a line of text but make fast intermittent movements called saccades (French, jerks), each followed by a short pause. By 1902, Raymond Dodge outlined five distinct types of eye movement that direct the fovea to a visual target and keep it there. All of these eye movements

share an effector pathway originating in the three oculomotor nuclei in the brain stem. · Saccadic eye movements shift the fovea rapidly to a new visual target.

·

Smooth-pursuit movements keep the image of a

- moving target on the fovea. · Vergence movements move the eyes in opposite
- directions so that the image of an object of interest is positioned on both foveae regardless of its
- distance. · Vestibulo-ocular reflexes stabilize images on the retina during brief head movements. · Optokinetic movements stabilize images during
- sustained head rotation or translation.
- A sixth system, the fixation system, holds the eye stationary during intent gaze when the head is not

moving by actively suppressing eye movement. The

optokinetic and vestibular systems are discussed in Chapter 27. We consider the other four systems here. An Active Fixation System Holds the Fovea on a Stationary Target

## Vision is most accurate when the eyes are still. The gaze system actively prevents the eyes from moving

when we examine an object of interest. It is not as

active in suppressing movement when we are doing something that does not require vision, such as mental arithmetic. Patients with disorders of the fixation system—for example, patients with irrepressible saccadic eye movements (opsoclonus)—have poor vision not because their visual acuity is deficient but because they cannot hold their eyes still enough for the visual system to work correctly.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 866

The Saccadic System Points the Fovea Toward

Objects of Interest

## Our eyes explore the world in a series of very quick saccades that move the fovea from one fixation point to another (Chapter 25) (Figure 35–5). Saccades allow

us to scan the environment quickly and to read. Highly stereotyped, they have a standard waveform with a single smooth increase and decrease of eye velocity. Saccades are also extremely fast, occurring within a fraction of a second at angular speeds up to 900° per second (Figure 35–6A). The velocity of a saccade is determined only by its size. We can voluntarily change

<!-- image -->

Figure 35–5 Eye movements track the outline of an object

of attention. An observer looks at a picture of a woman for

1 minute. The resulting eye positions are then superimposed

on the picture. As shown here, the observer concentrated on certain features of the face, lingering over the woman's eyes and mouth (fixations) and spending less time over intermediate positions. The rapid movements between fixation points are saccades. (Reproduced, with permission, from Yarbus 1967.)

<!-- image -->

20/01/21 11:20 AM

A Saccade

R

Figure 35–6 Saccadic and smooth-pursuit eye move-

<!-- image -->

ments. Eye position, target position, and eye velocity are

plotted against time.

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze

Eye position

Target position

Target moving Saccade Smooth pursuit

200 ms

B. Human smooth pursuit. In this example, the subject is asked

of gaze and then slowly moves back to center. The first

A. The human saccade. At the beginning of the plot, the eye is on the target (the traces representing eye and target positions are superimposed). Suddenly, the target jumps to the right, and

<!-- image -->

within 200 ms, the eye moves to bring the target back to the fovea. Note the smooth, symmetric velocity profile. Because eye movements are rotations of the eye in the orbit, they are described by the angle of rotation. Similarly, objects in the visual field are described by the angle of arc they subtend at the eye. Viewed at arm's length, a thumb subtends an angle of approximately 1°. A saccade from one edge of the thumb to the other therefore traverses 1° of arc. (Abbreviations: L, left; R, right.) the amplitude and direction of saccades but not their speed, although fatigue, drugs, or pathological states

can slow saccades.

Ordinarily, there is no time for visual feedback to modify the course of a saccade as it is being made; instead, corrections to the direction and/or amplitude of move-

ment are made over the course of successive saccades. Accurate saccades can be made not only to visual targets but also to sounds, tactile stimuli, memories of locations in space, and even verbal commands (eg, "look left"). When a saccade is made, the activity of neurons in higher brain centers that control gaze specify only a desired change in eye position (eg, 20° to the right

of current gaze, usually based on a target location in the visual field). For the eye movement to be made, this location signal must be transformed into signals for the eye muscles that execute the desired velocity and change in eye position. We can illustrate how the gaze system generates eye movements by considering the activity of an oculomotor neuron during a saccade (Figure 35–7A). To move the eye quickly to a new position in the orbit and keep it there, two passive forces

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 867

movement seen in the position and velocity traces is a smoothpursuit movement in the same direction as the target movement. The eye briefly moves away from the target before a saccade is initiated because the latency of the pursuit system is shorter than that of the saccade system. The smooth-pursuit system is activated by the target moving back toward the center of gaze, the saccade adjusts the eye's position to catch the target, and thereafter, smooth pursuit keeps the eye on the target. The recording of saccade velocity is clipped so that the movement can be shown on the scale of the pursuit movement, an order of magnitude slower than the saccade. must be overcome: the elastic force of the orbital tis -sues, which tends to restore the eye to a central posi-

tion, and a velocity-dependent viscous force that

opposes rapid movement. Thus, the motor signal for an eye movement must include both a position component to counter the elastic force and a velocity component to overcome orbital viscosity and move the eye quickly to the new position. This eye position and velocity information are coded by the discharge frequencies of oculomotor neurons. When a saccade is made, the firing rate of a neu-

ron rises rapidly as eye velocity increases; this is called the saccadic pulse (Figure 35–7B). The frequency of this pulse determines the speed of the saccade, whereas the length of the pulse controls the duration of the saccade and thus its amplitude. When the saccade is completed and the eye has reached its goal, there must be a new level of tonic input to the eye muscles that is appropriate for the elastic restoring force at that orbital position. This difference in the tonic firing rate between before and after the saccade is called the saccadic step (Figure 35–7B). If the size of the step is not properly matched to

20/01/21 11:20 AM




°



Part V / Movement

Figure 35–7 Oculomotor neurons signal eye position and

velocity.

A. The record is from an abducens neuron of a monkey. When the

## eye is positioned in the medial side of the orbit, the cell is silent (position θ 0 ). As the monkey makes a lateral saccade, there is a


burst of firing (D1), but in the new position (θ 1 ), the eye is still too far medial for the cell to discharge continually. During the next saccade, there is a burst (D2), and at the new position (θ 2 ), there is a tonic position-related discharge. Before and during the next saccade (D3), there is again a pulse of activity and a higher tonic discharge when the eye is at the new position (θ 3 ). When the eye makes a medial movement, there is a period of silence during the saccade (D4) even though the eye ends up at a position (θ ciated with a tonic discharge. (Adapted from Fuchs and Luschei 1970.) B. Saccades are associated with a step of activity, which signals the change in eye position, and a pulse of activity, which signals eye velocity. The neural activity corresponding to eye position and

) asso

velocity is illustrated both as a train of individual spikes and as an estimate of the instantaneous firing rate (spikes per second).

the pulse, then the eye drifts away from the target after Medial

<!-- image -->

the saccade. As described later, the pulse and step are Lateral Medial adjacent to the abducens nucleus to which it projects

(Figure 35–8A). The paramedian pontine reticular for-

generated by different brain stem structures.

The Motor Circuits for Saccades Lie in the Brain Stem

## Horizontal Saccades Are Generated in the Pontine Reticular Formation

## The neuronal signal for horizontal saccades originates in the paramedian pontine reticular formation,

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 868

mation contains a family of burst neurons that gives

rise to the saccadic pulse. These cells fire at a high frequency just before and during ipsiversive saccades (toward the same side as the discharging neurons), and their activity resembles the pulse component of oculomotor neuron discharge (Figure 35–7B). There are several types of burst neurons (Figure 35–8B). Medium-lead excitatory burst neurons make direct excitatory connections to motor neurons and

interneurons in the ipsilateral abducens nucleus.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

A

Lateral

θ

A

<!-- image -->

B

Eye Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze

<!-- image -->


°

Motor

neuron

Tonic

neuron

Burst

neuron

Omnipause

neuron

A. Eye velocity component. Long-lead burst neurons relay

signals from higher centers to the excitatory burst neurons. The eye velocity component arises from excitatory Nucleus of the dorsal raphe

Paramedian pontine

Abducens

Long-lead burst neurons drive the medium-lead burst

cells and receive excitatory input from higher cent-

ers. Inhibitory burst neurons suppress the activity

of contralateral abducens neurons and contralateral excitatory burst neurons and are themselves excited by medium-lead burst neurons. A second class of pontine cells, omnipause neurons, fires continuously except around the time of a saccade; firing ceases shortly before and during all saccades

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 869

burst neurons in the paramedian pontine reticular formation that synapse on motor neurons and interneurons in the abducens nucleus. The abducens motor neurons project to the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscles, while the interneurons project to the contralateral medial rectus motor neurons by axons that cross the midline and ascend in the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Excitatory burst neurons also drive ipsilateral inhibitory burst neurons that inhibit contralateral abducens motor neurons and excitatory burst neurons. Eye position component. This component arises from a neural integrator comprising neurons distributed throughout the medial vestibular nuclei and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi on both sides of the brain stem. These neurons

receive velocity signals from excitatory burst neurons and integrate this velocity signal to a position signal. The position signal excites the ipsilateral abducens neurons and inhibits the contralateral abducens neurons. (Gray neurons are inhibitory; all other neurons are excitatory. The vertical dashed line indicates the midline of the brain stem.) B. Different neurons provide different information for a horizontal saccade. The motor neuron provides both position and velocity signals. The tonic neuron (nucleus prepositus

hypoglossi) signals only eye position. The excitatory burst neuron (paramedian pontine reticular formation) signals only eye velocity. The omnipause neuron discharges at a high rate except immediately before, during, and just after the saccade. (Figure 35–8B). Omnipause neurons are located in

the nucleus of the dorsal raphe in the midline (Figure

35–8A). They are GABAergic (γ-aminobutyric acid)

inhibitory neurons that project to contralateral pontine and mesencephalic burst neurons. Electrical stimulation of omnipause neurons arrests a saccade, which resumes when the stimulation stops. Making a saccade requires simultaneous excitation of burst neurons and inhibition of omnipause cells; this provides the system

20/01/21 11:20 AM



Part V / Movement

with additional stability, such that unwanted saccades

are infrequent.

If the motor neurons received signals from only

the burst cells, the eyes would drift back to the starting position after a saccade, because there would be

no new position signal to hold the eyes against elastic restorative forces. The appropriate tonic innervation is required to keep the eye at the new orbital position. This tonic position signal, the saccadic step, can be generated from the velocity burst signal by the neural equivalent of the mathematical process of integration. Velocity can be computed by differentiating position with respect to time; conversely, position can be computed by integrating velocity with respect to time. For horizontal eye movements, neural integration of the velocity signal is performed by the medial vestibular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi

(Figure 35–8A) in conjunction with the flocculus of the cerebellum. As expected, animals with lesions of these areas make normal horizontal saccades, but the eyes drift back to a middle position after a saccade. Moreover, integration of the horizontal saccadic burst requires coordination of the bilateral nuclei prepositi hypoglossi and medial vestibular nuclei through commissural connections. Thus, a midline lesion of these connections also causes failure of the neural integrator. Medium-lead burst neurons in the paramedian pontine reticular formation and neurons of the medial vestibular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypo-

glossi project to the ipsilateral abducens nucleus and deliver respectively the pulse and step components of the motor signal. Two populations of neurons in the abducens nucleus receive this signal. One is a group of motor neurons that innervate the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. The second group consists of interneurons whose axons cross the midline and ascend in the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the motor neurons for the contralateral medial rectus, which lie in the oculomotor nucleus (Figure 35–8A). Thus, medial rectus motor neurons do not receive the pulse and step signals directly. This arrangement allows for precise coordination of corresponding

movements of both eyes during horizontal saccades and other conjugate eye movements. The susceptibility of the medial longitudinal fasciculus to strokes and multiple sclerosis make it clinically important. Several cerebellar structures play an important role in the calibration of the saccade motor signal. First, the oculomotor portion of the dorsal vermis, act-

ing through the caudal fastigial nucleus, controls the duration of the pulse and thus the accuracy of the saccade. The fastigial nucleus increases saccade velocity at the beginning of contraversive saccades and contributes to

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 870

braking ipsiversive saccades to end the saccade. Sec-

ond, the flocculus and paraflocculus of the vestibu-

locerebellum calibrate the neural integrator to ensure

that the step is properly matched to the pulse, in order to hold the eyes at the new position after each saccade. Vertical Saccades Are Generated in the Mesencephalic Reticular Formation

## The burst neurons responsible for vertical saccades are found in the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial

longitudinal fasciculus in the mesencephalic reticular

formation (Figure 35–3). Vertical and torsional neural integration are performed in the nearby interstitial nucleus of Cajal. The pontine and mesencephalic systems participate together in the generation of oblique saccades, which have both horizontal and vertical components. Purely vertical saccades require activity on both sides of the mesencephalic reticular formation, and communication between the two sides occurs via the

posterior commissure. There are not separate omnipause neurons for horizontal and vertical saccades; pontine omnipause cells inhibit both pontine and mesencephalic burst neurons. Brain Stem Lesions Result in Characteristic Deficits in Eye Movements

## We can now understand how different brain stem lesions cause characteristic syndromes. Lesions that

include the paramedian pontine reticular formation

result in paralysis of ipsiversive horizontal gaze of both eyes but spare contraversive and vertical saccades. A lesion of the abducens nucleus has a similar effect, as both abducens motor neurons and interneurons are affected. Lesions that include the midbrain gaze centers cause paralysis of vertical gaze. Certain neurological disorders cause degeneration of burst neurons and impair their function, leading to a progressive slowing of saccades. Lesions of the medial longitudinal fasciculus disconnect the medial rectus motor neurons from the abducens interneurons (Figure 35–8A). Thus, dur-

ing conjugate horizontal eye movements, such as saccades and pursuit, the abducting eye moves normally but adduction of the other eye is impeded. Despite this paralysis in version movements, the medial rectus typically acts normally in vergence movements because the motor neurons for vergence lie in the midbrain, as will be discussed later. This syndrome, called an internuclear ophthalmoplegia, is a consequence of a brain stem stroke or demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

A lesion of the cerebellar fastigial nucleus

causes ipsiversive saccades to overshoot their targets

(hypermetric saccades), due to failure of normal termi-

nation of the saccadic burst. Contraversive saccades undershoot their targets (hypometric saccades). Correspondingly, damage to the oculomotor vermis disinhibits the fastigial nucleus and causes hypometric ipsiversive saccades. This may be due to an additional failure to compensate for the position-dependent passive forces of the orbital tissues. Saccades Are Controlled by the Cerebral Cortex

Through the Superior Colliculus

## The pontine and mesencephalic burst circuits provide the motor signals necessary to drive the extraocu-

lar muscles for saccades. However, among higher

A Monkey

Figure 35–9 Cortical pathways for

saccades.

A. In the monkey, the saccade generator in

## the brain stem receives a command from the superior colliculus. That command is relayed

through the pontine and mesencephalic burst circuits, providing the motor signals that drive the extraocular muscles for saccades. The col -liculus receives direct excitatory projections from the frontal eye fields and the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) and an inhibitory projection from the substantia nigra. The substantia nigra is suppressed by the caudate nucleus, which in turn is excited by the frontal eye fields. Thus, the frontal eye fields directly excite the colliculus and indirectly release it from suppression by the substantia nigra by exciting the caudate nucleus, which inhibits the sub -stantia nigra. The oculomotor vermis (OMV) of the cerebellum, acting through the fastigial nucleus (FN), calibrates the burst to keep saccades accurate. B. This lateral scan of a human brain shows areas of cortex activated during saccades. (Adapted from Curtis and Connolly 2008.)

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 871

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze


mammals, eye movements are ultimately driven by

cognitive behavior. The decision of when and where to

make a saccade that is behaviorally important is usu-

ally made in the cerebral cortex. A network of cortical and subcortical areas controls the saccadic system through the superior colliculus (Figure 35–9). The Superior Colliculus Integrates Visual and Motor Information into Oculomotor Signals

for the Brain Stem

## The superior colliculus in the midbrain is a major visuomotor integration region, the mammalian homolog of

the optic tectum in nonmammalian vertebrates. It can

be divided into two functional regions: the superficial layers and the intermediate and deep layers. The three superficial layers receive both direct input from the retina and a projection from the striate

Supplementary

eye eld Posterior parietal Selects Relays cortical decision to motor centers Calibrates innervation for saccade accuracy Transforms cortical target choice into muscle signals

<!-- image -->

20/01/21 11:20 AM


Part V / Movement

cortex representing the entire contralateral visual hemi-

field. Neurons in the superficial layers respond to vis-

ual stimuli. In monkeys, the responses of half of these

vision-related neurons are quantitatively enhanced when an animal prepares to make a saccade to a stimulus in the cell's receptive field. This enhancement is specific for saccades. If the monkey attends to the stimulus without making a saccade to it—for example, by making a hand movement in response to a brightness change—the neuron's response is not augmented. Neurons in the superficial layers of the superior colliculus are functionally arranged in a retinotopic map of the visual field in which representation of the visual field closest to the fovea occupies the largest area (Figure 35–10). Neuronal activity in the two intermediate and deep layers is primarily related to oculomotor actions. The movement-related neurons in these layers receive

visual information from the prestriate, middle temporal, and parietal cortices and motor information from the frontal eye field. The intermediate and deep layers also contain somatotopic, tonotopic, and retinotopic maps of sensory inputs, all in register with one another. For example, the image of a bird will excite a vision-related neuron, whereas the bird's chirp will excite an adjacent audition-related neuron, and both A Left visual eld B Right superior colliculus map




<!-- image -->





–30

–60

–90

40 50

A. Map of the left visual field in polar coordinates. Dashed

lines represent the angle and solid lines the eccentricity. B. Spatial map of neurons in the superior colliculus represented

in polar coordinates of the visual field. In the nucleus, more neurons represent the part of the visual field close to the fovea

and fewer neurons represent the periphery. For example, a stimulus appearing at 20° eccentricity and 30° elevation in the visual field (red dot) will excite neurons at the location of the red dot on the collicular map. (Reproduced, with permission, from Quaia et al. 1998.)

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 872

will excite a bimodal neuron. Polymodal spatial maps

enable us to shift our eyes toward auditory or soma-

tosensory stimuli as well as visual ones.

Much of the early research describing the sensory responsiveness of neurons in the intermediate layer was done in anesthetized animals. To understand how

the brain generates movement, however, the activity of neurons needs to be studied in alert, active animals. Edward Evarts pioneered this approach in studies of the skeletomotor system, after which it was extended to the oculomotor system. One of the earliest cellular studies in active ani -mals revealed that individual movement-related neu -rons in the superior colliculus selectively discharge

before saccades of specific amplitudes and directions, just as individual vision-related neurons in the superior colliculus respond to stimuli at specific distances and directions from the fovea (Figure 35–11A). The movement-related neurons form a map of potential eye movements that is in register with the visuotopic and tonotopic arrays of sensory inputs, so that the neurons that control eye movements to a particular target are found in the same region as the cells excited by the sounds and image of that target. Each movementrelated neuron in the superior colliculus has a movement field, a region of the visual field that is the target for saccades controlled by that neuron. There is a map of movement fields in the intermediate layers that is in register with the map of visual receptive fields in the overlying superficial layers. Each movement neuron discharges before a saccade to the center of the overlying visual receptive field. A map of saccades evoked by electrical stimulation of the intermediate layers resembles the visual map. Movement fields are large, so each superior colliculus cell fires before a wide range of saccades, although each cell fires most intensely before saccades

of a specific direction and amplitude. A large population of cells is thus active before each saccade, and eye movement is encoded by the entire ensemble of these broadly tuned cells. Because each cell makes only a small contribution to the direction and amplitude of the movement, any variability or noise in the discharge of a given cell is minimized. Similar population coding is found in many sensory systems (Chapter 17) and the skeletal motor system (Chapter 34). Activity in the superficial and intermediate layers of the superior colliculus can occur independently: Sensory activity in the superficial layers does not

always lead to motor output, and motor output can occur without sensory activity in the superficial layers. In fact, the neurons in the superficial layers do not provide a large projection directly to the intermediate

20/01/21 11:20 AM

Superior

colliculus

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

200 ms

Figure 35–11 Neurons in the superior colliculus and sub-

(Reproduced, with permission, from Hikosaka and Wurtz 1989.)

A. A neuron recorded from the region in the superior colliculus from which the neuron in B could be excited antidromically fires in a burst immediately before the saccade. Raster plots

of activity in successive trials of the same task are summed to form the histogram below. The small vertical lines in the raster indicate target appearance. The trials are aligned at the beginning of the saccade (blue line). B. A neuron in the substantia nigra pars reticulata is tonically active, becomes quiet just before the saccade, and resumes activity after the saccade. This type of neuron inhibits neurons

- in the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 873

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze


layers. Instead, their axons terminate on neurons in the

pulvinar and lateral posterior nuclei of the thalamus,

which relay the signals from the superficial layers of

the superior colliculus to cortical regions that project back to the intermediate layers. Lesions of a small part of the colliculus affect the latency, accuracy, and velocity of saccades. Destruction of the entire colliculus renders a monkey unable to

make any contraversive saccades, although with time, this ability is recovered. The Rostral Superior Colliculus Facilitates Visual Fixation

## The most rostral portion of the superior colliculus receives inputs from the fovea and the foveal repre-

sentation in primary visual cortex (V1). Neurons in the

intermediate layers in this region discharge strongly during active visual fixation and before small saccades to the contralateral visual field. Because the neurons are active during visual fixation, this area of the superior colliculus is often called the fixation zone. Neurons here inhibit the movement-related neu -rons in the more caudal parts of the colliculus and also project directly to the nucleus of the dorsal raphe,

where they inhibit saccade generation by exciting the omnipause neurons. With lesions in the fixation zone, an animal is more likely to make saccades to distracting stimuli. The Basal Ganglia and Two Regions of Cerebral Cortex Control the Superior Colliculus

## The superior colliculus receives a powerful GABAergic inhibitory projection from neurons in the substantia nigra, which fire spontaneously with high frequency.

This discharge is suppressed at the time of voluntary eye movements to the contralateral visual field (Figure 35–11B) by inhibitory input from neurons in the caudate nucleus, which fire before saccades to the contralateral visual field. The superior colliculus is controlled by two regions of the cerebral cortex that have overlapping but distinct functions: the lateral intraparietal area of the pos-

terior parietal cortex (part of Brodmann's area 7) and the frontal eye field (part of Brodmann's area 8). Each of these areas contributes to the generation of saccades and the control of visual attention. Perception of attended objects in the visual field is better than perception of unattended objects, as measured either by a subject's reaction time to an object

suddenly appearing in the visual field or by the subject's ability to perceive a stimulus that is just barely

20/01/21 11:20 AM


Part V / Movement

noticeable. Saccadic eye movements and visual atten-

tion are closely intertwined (Figure 35–5).

The lateral intraparietal area in the monkey is

important in the generation of both visual attention and saccades. The role of this area in the processing of

eye movements is best illustrated by a memory-guided saccade. To demonstrate this saccade, a monkey first fixates a spot of light. An object (the stimulus) appears in the receptive field of a neuron and then disappears; then the spot of light is extinguished. After a delay, the monkey must make a saccade to the former location of the vanished object. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area respond from the moment the object appears and continue firing after the object has vanished and throughout the delay until the saccade begins (Figure 35–12A), but their activity can be also dissociated from saccade planning. If the monkey is planning a saccade

A Neuron res from appearance of target until saccade


Receptive eld

<!-- image -->

100 ms 
Saccade Saccade


spikes/s

100 ms

It continues to fire after the target has disappeared but before

the signal to make the saccade and stops firing after the onset

of the saccade (2).

Target

<!-- image -->

vertical lines. (Adapted, with permission, from Powell and to a target outside the receptive field of a neuron and a distractor appears in the field during the delay period, the neuron responds as vigorously to the distractor as it does to the target of a saccade (Figure 35–12B). Lesioning of a monkey's posterior parietal cortex, which includes the lateral intraparietal area, increases the latency of saccades and reduces their accuracy.

Such a lesion also produces selective neglect: A monkey with a unilateral parietal lesion preferentially attends to stimuli in the ipsilateral visual hemifield. In humans as well, parietal lesions—especially right parietal lesions—initially cause dramatic attentional deficits. Patients act as if the objects in the neglected field do not exist, and they have difficulty making eye movements into that field (Chapter 59). Patients with Balint syndrome, which is usually the result of bilateral lesions of the posterior parietal

Recording from

lateral intraparietal

neuron

<!-- image -->

in receptive eld

- Target Distractor

<!-- image -->

Goldberg 2000.) A. The monkey plans a saccade from a fixation point to a target in the receptive field of a neuron in the lateral intraparietal cortex. The neuron responds to the appearance of the target (1).

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 874

B. The monkey plans a saccade to a target outside the receptive field. The neuron responds initially to a distractor in the receptive field as strongly as it did to the target of a

- saccade.

20/01/21 11:20 AM
Part V / Movement

noticeable. Saccadic eye movements and visual atten-

tion are closely intertwined (Figure 35–5).

The lateral intraparietal area in the monkey is

important in the generation of both visual attention and saccades. The role of this area in the processing of

eye movements is best illustrated by a memory-guided saccade. To demonstrate this saccade, a monkey first fixates a spot of light. An object (the stimulus) appears in the receptive field of a neuron and then disappears; then the spot of light is extinguished. After a delay, the monkey must make a saccade to the former location of the vanished object. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area respond from the moment the object appears and continue firing after the object has vanished and throughout the delay until the saccade begins (Figure 35–12A), but their activity can be also dissociated from saccade planning. If the monkey is planning a saccade

A Neuron res from appearance of target until saccade


Receptive eld

<!-- image -->

100 ms 
Saccade Saccade


spikes/s

100 ms

It continues to fire after the target has disappeared but before

the signal to make the saccade and stops firing after the onset

of the saccade (2).

Target

<!-- image -->

vertical lines. (Adapted, with permission, from Powell and to a target outside the receptive field of a neuron and a distractor appears in the field during the delay period, the neuron responds as vigorously to the distractor as it does to the target of a saccade (Figure 35–12B). Lesioning of a monkey's posterior parietal cortex, which includes the lateral intraparietal area, increases the latency of saccades and reduces their accuracy.

Such a lesion also produces selective neglect: A monkey with a unilateral parietal lesion preferentially attends to stimuli in the ipsilateral visual hemifield. In humans as well, parietal lesions—especially right parietal lesions—initially cause dramatic attentional deficits. Patients act as if the objects in the neglected field do not exist, and they have difficulty making eye movements into that field (Chapter 59). Patients with Balint syndrome, which is usually the result of bilateral lesions of the posterior parietal

Recording from

lateral intraparietal

neuron

<!-- image -->

in receptive eld

- Target Distractor

<!-- image -->

Goldberg 2000.) A. The monkey plans a saccade from a fixation point to a target in the receptive field of a neuron in the lateral intraparietal cortex. The neuron responds to the appearance of the target (1).

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 874

B. The monkey plans a saccade to a target outside the receptive field. The neuron responds initially to a distractor in the receptive field as strongly as it did to the target of a

- saccade.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

and prestriate cortex, tend to see and describe only

one object at a time in their visual environment. These

patients make few saccades, as if they are unable to

shift the focus of their attention from the fovea, and can therefore describe only a foveal target. Even after these patients have recovered from most of their deficits, their saccades are delayed and inaccurate. Compared to the neurons in the parietal cortex, neurons in the frontal eye field are more closely associated with saccades. Three different types of neurons in

the frontal eye field discharge before saccades. Visual neurons respond to visual stimuli, and half of these neurons respond more vigorously to stimuli that are the targets of saccades (Figure 35–13A). Activity in

these cells is not enhanced when an animal responds to the stimulus without making a saccade to it. Likewise, these cells are not activated before saccades that are made without visual targets; monkeys can be trained to make saccades of a specific direction and amplitude in total darkness. Movement-related neurons fire before and during saccades to their movement fields. Unlike the movementrelated cells in the superior colliculus, which fire before Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze


target. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has neurons

that discharge when a monkey makes a saccade to a

remembered target. The activity commences with the

appearance of the stimulus and continues throughout the interval during which the monkey must remember the location of the target. We can now understand the effects of lesions of these regions on the generation of saccades. Lesions of the superior colliculus in monkeys produce only tran-

sient damage to the saccade system because the projection from the frontal eye field to the brain stem remains intact. Animals can likewise recover from cortical lesions if the superior colliculus is intact. However, when both the frontal eye field and the colliculus are damaged, the ability to make saccades is permanently compromised. The predominant effect of a parietal lesion is an attentional deficit. After recovery, however, the system can function normally because the frontal eye field signals are sufficient to suppress the substantia nigra and stimulate the colliculus. Damage to the frontal eye field alone causes more subtle deficits. Lesions of the frontal eye field in monkeys cause transient contralateral neglect and paresis

all saccades, movement-related neurons of the frontal eye field fire only before saccades that are relevant to the monkey's behavior (Figure 35–13B). These neurons, especially those whose receptive fields lie in the visual periphery, project more strongly to the superior colliculus than do the visual neurons. Visuomovement neurons have both visual and movement-related activity and discharge most strongly before visually guided saccades. Electrical stimulation

of the frontal eye field evokes saccades to the movement fields of the stimulated cells. Bilateral stimula tion of the frontal eye field evokes vertical saccades. Movement-related neurons in frontal eye field control the superior colliculus through two pathways. They excite the superior colliculus directly and they

-of contraversive gaze, which recover rapidly. The latter deficit may reflect the loss of frontal eye field control of the substantia nigra; this loss of control means that the constant inhibitory input from the substantia nigra to the colliculus does not get suppressed, and the colliculus is unable to generate any saccades. Eventually the system adapts, and the colliculus responds to the remaining parietal signal. After recovery, the animals have no trouble producing saccades to targets in the visual field but have great difficulty with memory-guided saccades. Bilateral lesions of both the frontal eye fields and the superior colliculus render monkeys unable to make saccades at all. Humans with lesions of the frontal cortex have difficulty suppressing unwanted saccades to attended stimuli. This is easily shown by asking subjects to make an

release it from the inhibitory influence of the substantia nigra by exciting the caudate nucleus, which in turn inhibits the nigra (Figure 35–9A). The frontal eye field also projects to the pontine and mesencephalic reticular formations, although not directly to the burst cells. Two other cortical regions besides LIP that have inputs to the frontal eye field are thought to be important in the cognitive aspects of saccades. The sup-

plementary eye field at the most rostral part of the supplementary motor area contains neurons that encode spatial information other than the direction of the desired eye movement. For example, a neuron in the left supplementary eye field that ordinarily fires before rightward eye movements will fire before a leftward saccade if that saccade is to the right side of the

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 875

-

eye movement away from a stimulus, the "anti-saccades task." For example, if a stimulus appears on the left, the subject should make a saccade of the same size to the right. To do this, the subject must attend to the stimulus, without turning the eyes toward it, and use its location to calculate the desired saccade to the opposite direction. Patients with frontal lesions have great difficulty suppressing the unwanted saccade to the stimulus. As we have seen, neurons in the lateral intraparietal area of monkeys are active when the animal attends to a visual stimulus whether or not the animal makes

a saccade to the stimulus. In the absence of frontal eye field signals, this undifferentiated signal is the only one to reach the superior colliculus. In humans, the failure to suppress a saccade is therefore to be expected

20/01/21 11:20 AM


Part V / Movement

A Visual neuron responds to the stimulus and not to movement

Target

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Target

Figure 35–13 Visual and movement-related neurons in the

frontal eye field. (Reproduced, with permission, from Bruce

and Goldberg 1985.)

A. Activity of a visual neuron in the frontal eye field as a monkey makes a saccade to a target in its visual field. Raster plots of activity in successive trials of the same task are summed to

<!-- image -->

form the histogram below. In the record on the left, the individual trials are aligned at the appearance of the stimulus. A burst

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 876

200 ms

200 ms

of firing is closely time-locked to the stimulus. In the record on

the right, the trials are aligned at the beginning of the saccade.

Activity is not well aligned with the beginning of the saccade

and stops before the saccade itself commences. B. Activity of a movement-related neuron in the frontal eye field. The records of each trial are aligned as in part A. The cell does not respond to appearance of the saccade target (left) but

is active at the time of the saccade (right).

20/01/21 11:20 AM

Frontal if the superior colliculus responds to a parietal signal that generates attention to the stimulus without the frontal-nigral control that normally prevents saccades in response to parietal signals. The Control of Saccades Can Be Modified by Experience

## Quantitative study of the neural control of movement is possible because the discharge rate of a motor neuron has

a predictable effect on a movement. For example, a cer-

tain frequency of firing in the abducens motor neuron has a predictable effect on eye position and velocity. This relationship can change if disease damages an oculomotor nerve or causes an eye muscle to become weak, although the brain can compensate to

some degree for such changes. Guntram Kommerell described a case that dramatically illustrates this point. A diabetic patient had an acute partial abducens nerve lesion affecting one eye and a retinal hemorrhage in the other. Because of the poor vision in the eye with a normal abducens nerve, he ordinarily used the eye with the newly weakened lateral rectus muscle. After a few days, the eye recovered the ability to make fairly accurate eye movements. When the weak eye was patched and the subject attempted to make a saccade with the visually poor eye, the saccade overshot the target. This implies that in order to compensate for the weakness of the visually normal eye the brain increased the neural signal to both eyes, resulting in too large a signal to the eye with normal motor input. This change in the motor response depends on the fastigial nucleus and vermis of the cerebellum (Figure 35–9A) and results from the visual system signaling that the preceding eye movement was inaccurate. Some Rapid Gaze Shifts Require Coordinated Head and Eye Movements

## So far, we have described how the eyes are moved when the head is still. When we look around, however, our head is moving as well. Head and eye movements

must be coordinated to direct the fovea to a target. Because the head has a much greater inertia than the eyes, a small shift in gaze drives the fovea to its target before the head begins to move. A small gaze

shift usually consists of a saccade followed by a small head movement during which the vestibulo-ocular reflex moves the eyes back to the center of the orbit in the new head position (Figure 35–14). For larger gaze shifts, the eyes and the head move simultaneously in the same direction. Because the vestibulo-ocular reflex ordinarily moves the eyes in the direction opposite that of the head, the reflex must be temporarily suppressed.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 877

Eye Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze

A Small gaze shift


°

Eye 0

°

<!-- image -->

B Large gaze shift

–40

°

## 0 °

<!-- image -->


°

0.5

Figure 35–14 Directing the fovea to an object when

the head is moving requires coordinated head and eye

movements.

A. For a small gaze shift, the eye and head move in sequence. The eye begins to move 300 ms after the target appears. Near the end of the eye movement, the head begins to move as

well. The eye then rotates back to the center of the orbit to compensate for the head movement. The gaze record is the sum of eye and head movements. (Abbreviations: L, left; R, right.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Zee 1977.) B. For a large gaze shift, the eye and head move in the same direction simultaneously. Near the end of the gaze shift, the vestibulo-ocular reflex returns, the eye begins to compensate

for head movement as in part A, and gaze becomes still. (Reproduced, with permission, from Laurutis and Robinson 1986.)

20/01/21 11:20 AM

/s


R


R



Part V / Movement

The Smooth-Pursuit System Keeps Moving

Targets on the Fovea

## The smooth-pursuit system holds the image of a moving target on the fovea by calculating how fast the tar-

get is moving and moving the eyes at the same speed.

Smooth-pursuit movements have a maximum angular velocity of approximately 100° per second, much slower than saccades. Drugs, fatigue, alcohol, and even distraction degrade the quality of these movements. Smooth pursuit and saccades have very different central control systems. This is best seen when a target jumps away from the center of gaze and then slowly

moves back toward it. A smooth-pursuit movement is initiated first because the smooth-pursuit system has a shorter latency and responds to target motion on the peripheral retina as well as on the fovea. The task of the smooth-pursuit system differs from that of the saccade system. Instead of driving the eyes as rapidly as possible to a point in space, it must match the velocity of the eyes to that of a target in space. Therefore, as the target moves back toward the center of gaze, the smooth-pursuit system briefly moves the eye away from the target before the saccade is initiated (Figure 35–6B). The subsequent saccade then brings the eye to the target. Neurons that signal eye velocity for smooth pursuit are found in the medial vestibular nucleus and the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi. They receive projections from the flocculus of the cerebellum and project to the abducens nucleus as well as the oculomotor nuclei in the midbrain. Neurons in both the flocculus and vermis transmit an eye-velocity signal that correlates with smooth pursuit. These areas receive signals from the cerebral cor-

tex relayed by the dorsolateral pontine nucleus (Figure 35–15). Thus, lesions in the dorsolateral pons disrupt ipsiversive smooth pursuit. Frontal eye eld

Figure 35–15 Cortical pathways for

smooth-pursuit eye movements in

the monkey.  The cerebral cortex pro-

cesses information about motion in the There are two major cortical inputs to the smooth- pursuit system in monkeys. One arises from motion- sensitive regions in the superior temporal sulcus and the middle temporal and medial superior temporal areas. The other arises from the frontal eye field. The middle temporal and medial superior temporal areas were named because of their position in sulcusfree cortex of the owl monkey, a New World monkey.

visual field and sends it to the oculomo tor neurons via the dorsolateral pontine nuclei, the vermis and flocculus of the cerebellum, and the vestibular nuclei. The initiation signal for smooth pursuit may originate in part from the frontal eye field.

In humans and Old World monkeys, these areas lie in the superior temporal sulcus, at the junction between the occipital and parietal lobes. Neurons in both the middle temporal and medial superior temporal areas calculate the velocity of the target. When the eye accelerates to match the target's speed, the rate of the target's motion across the retina decreases. As the speed of the retinal image decreases, neurons in the middle temporal area, whose activity signals retinal-image motion, stop firing, even though the target continues to move in space. Neurons in the medial superior temporal area continue to fire even if the target disappears briefly. These neurons have access to a process that adds the speeds of the moving eye and the target moving on the retina to compute the speed of the target in space. Lesions of either the middle temporal or medial superior temporal area disrupt the ability of a subject to respond to targets moving in regions of the visual

field represented in the damaged cortical area. Lesions of the latter area also diminish smooth-pursuit movements toward the side of the lesion, no matter where the target lies on the retina. The two motion-selective areas provide the sensory information to guide pursuit movements but may not be able to initiate them. Electrical stimulation of either

Middle temporal (MT) area does not initiate smooth pursuit but can affect pursuit movement, accelerating ipsiversive pursuit and slowing contraversive pursuit. The frontal eye field may

and medial superior

temporal (MST) areas

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 878

Motion

information

processed

Computation

of eye velocity

Translation into

motor signals

for smooth

pursuit

20/01/21 11:20 AM

be more important for initiating pursuit. This area has

neurons that fire in association with ipsiversive smooth

pursuit. Electrical stimulation of the frontal eye field

initiates ipsiversive pursuit, whereas lesions of this area diminish but do not eliminate smooth pursuit. In humans, disruption of the pursuit pathway anywhere along its course, including lesions at the level of cortical, cerebellar, and brain stem areas, prevents

adequate smooth-pursuit eye movements. Instead, moving targets are tracked using a combination of defective smooth-pursuit movements (the velocity is less than that of the target) and small saccades. Patients with brain stem and cerebellar lesions cannot pursue targets moving toward the side of the lesion. Patients with parietal deficits that include the motion-sensitive areas have two different types of deficit. The first is a directional deficit that resem Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze


with lesions of the middle temporal area: There is an

impairment of smooth pursuit of a stimulus limited to

the visual hemifield opposite the lesion, regardless of

the direction of motion. The Vergence System Aligns the Eyes to

Look at Targets at Different Depths

## The smooth-pursuit and saccade systems produce conjugate eye movements: Both eyes move in the same

direction and at the same speed. In contrast, the ver-

bles that of monkeys with lesions of the medial superior temporal area: targets moving toward the side of the lesion cannot be tracked. The second is a reti notopic deficit that resembles the deficit of monkeys

Figure 35–16 Vergence movements. When the eyes

focus on a distant mountain, images of the mountain lie on

the foveae, while those of the tree in the forefront occupy

different retinal positions, yielding the percept of a double image. When the viewer looks instead at the tree, the vergence system must rotate each eye inward. Now the tree's image occupies similar positions on both foveae and is seen as one object, but the mountain's images occupy different locations on the retinas and appear double. (Reproduced, with permission, from F.A. Miles.)

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 879

--Focus on mountain Mountain gence system produces disconjugate movements of the eyes. When we look at an object that is close to us, our eyes converge or rotate toward each other; when we look at an object that is farther away, they diverge or rotate away from each other (Figure 35–16). These disconjugate movements ensure that the image of the object falls on the foveae of both retinas. Whereas the visual system uses slight differences in left and right retinal positions, or retinal disparity, to create a

<!-- image -->

Tree

Fovea

Fovea

20/01/21 11:20 AM


Part V / Movement

sense of depth, vergence movements eliminate retinal

disparity at the fovea.

Vergence is a function of the horizontal rectus

muscles only, because the two eyes are horizontally, not vertically, displaced. Convergence of the eyes for

near-field viewing is accomplished by simultaneously increasing the tone of the medial recti muscles and decreasing the tone of the lateral recti muscles to converge the eyes. Conversely, distance viewing is accomplished by reducing the tone of the medial rectus and increasing the tone of the lateral rectus. At any given time, the entire visual field is not in focus on the retina. When we look at something nearby, distant objects are blurred. When we look at something

far away, near objects are blurred. When we wish to focus on an object in a closer plane in the visual field, the oculomotor system contracts the ciliary muscle, thereby changing the radius of curvature of the lens. This process is called accommodation. With age, accommodation declines owing to increased rigidity of the lens; reading glasses are then needed to focus images at short distances. Accommodation and vergence are linked. Accommodation is elicited by the blurring of an image, and whenever accommodation occurs, the eyes also con-

verge. Conversely, retinal disparity induces vergence, and whenever the eyes converge, accommodation also takes place. At the same time, the pupils transiently constrict to increase the depth of field of the focus. The linked phenomena of accommodation, vergence, and pupillary constriction comprise the near response. Accommodation and vergence are controlled by midbrain neurons in the region of the oculomotor nucleus. Neurons in this region discharge during vergence, accommodation, or both. Highlights

1.

The oculomotor system provides a valuable win-

dow into the nervous system for both the clini-

cian and the scientist. Patients with oculomotor

- deficits may experience alarming symptoms such as double vision that quickly send them to seek medical help. A physician with a thorough knowledge of the oculomotor system can describe and diagnose most oculomotor deficits at the bedside and localize the site of the lesion within the brain based on the neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of eye movements. 2. The purpose of eye movements is to rotate the eye in the orbit in order to direct the fovea, the area of the retina with best acuity, to the point of
- greatest interest in the visual scene and then to keep the image steady.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 880

3.

Six muscles work together to move each eye. These

eye muscles are yoked in three pairs. The lateral

rectus abducts the eye horizontally, and the medial

- rectus adducts it. The cyclovertical eye muscles move the eye both vertically and torsionally. 4. Motor neurons for the extraocular muscles lie in three brainstem nuclei. The abducens nucleus in the pons contains the neurons for the lateral
- rectus. The other oculomotor neurons are in the midbrain: The trochlear nucleus contains superior oblique neurons, and the oculomotor nucleus has the motor neurons for the medial, superior, and inferior rectus muscles and the inferior oblique muscle. Neurons that constrict the pupil and those that elevate the eyelid also lie in the oculomotor nucleus. 5. There are six different types of eye movements, with different control systems: (1) Saccades shift the fovea rapidly to a new visual target. (2)
- Smooth-pursuit movements keep the image of a moving object on the fovea. (3) Vergence movements rotate the eyes in opposite directions so that the image of an object of interest is positioned on both foveae regardless of its distance. (4) Vestibuloocular reflexes hold images still on the retina during brief, rapid head movements. (5) Optokinetic movements hold images stationary during sustained or slow head movements. (6) Fixation is an active process that keeps the eye still during intent gaze when the head is not moving. 6. The firing pattern of eye muscle neurons combines independent signals that code eye position and velocity. The neurons that generate the
- velocity signal for horizontal saccades lie in the paramedian pontine reticular formation, and this velocity signal is integrated in the medial vestibular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi to provide the position signal. 7. The mesencephalic reticular formation provides the position and velocity signals for vertical and torsional eye movements as well as vergence eye
- movements. 8. Presaccadic burst neurons in the superior colliculus project a desired displacement signal to the reticular formation. These neurons are inhibited
- by a GABAergic projection from the substantia nigra and excited by projections from the frontal eye field and the posterior parietal cortex. A motor signal from the frontal eye field excites the caudate nucleus, which then inhibits the substantia nigra, allowing a saccade to occur . 9. The posterior parietal cortex projects an attentional signal to the superior colliculus that does not distinguish between attention and movement.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

10.

Most large gaze shifts involve head movements

as well as eye movements. Because the eye

moves faster than the head, it typically reaches

- the target first. The vestibulo-ocular reflex maintains the eye on target by driving the eye with a velocity opposite to that of the head movement. 11. The cerebellum calibrates eye movements based on visual feedback and mediates the learning process that keeps them accurate over time.

References

Andersen RA, Asanuma C, Essick G, Siegel RM. 1990. Cor-

ticocortical connections of anatomically and physiologi-

cally defined subdivisions within the inferior parietal

- lobule. J Comp Neurol 296:65–113. Andersen RA, Cui H. 2009. Intention, action planning, and decision making in parietal-frontal circuits. Neuron 63:568–583.
- -Barnes GR. 2008. Cognitive processes involved in smooth pursuit eye movements. Brain Cogn 68:309–326. Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2006. Neural correlates of atten-
12. Smooth pursuit is driven by a network that includes the medial vestibular nucleus, the floc culus of the cerebellum, the dorsolateral pontine
- nucleus, and two motion-selective areas that are found in the superior temporal sulcus of some monkeys—the middle temporal and medial superior temporal areas. Homologous areas in the human brain are located at the parieto-occipital junction. The pursuit area of the frontal eye fields initiates smooth-pursuit movements. 13. Although the motor programming of eye movements is well understood, the great bulk of physiological research in this field was done with a
- monkey making a directed saccade to a spot of light. The neural mechanisms underlying the free choice of saccade targets as we explore the visual world are poorly understood. This question, lying at the intersection of cognition and motor control, is one of the great unknowns in neuroscience and will be at the center of oculomotor research in the future.

Michael E. Goldberg

- tion and distractibility in the lateral intraparietal area. J Neurophysiol 95:1696–1717.
- Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME. 1985. Primate frontal eye fields. I. Single neurons discharging before saccades. J Neurophysiol 53:603–635.
- Büttner-Ennever JA, Büttner U, Cohen B, Baumgartner G. 1982. Vertical gaze paralysis and the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Brain
- 105:125–149. Büttner-Ennever JA, Cohen B, Pause M, Fries W. 1988. Raphe nucleus of the pons containing omnipause neurons of the oculomotor system in the monkey, and its homologue in
- man. J Comp Neurol 267:307–321. Cannon SC, Robinson DA. 1987. Loss of the neural integrator of the oculomotor system from brain stem lesions in monkey. J Neurophysiol 57:1383–1409.
- Cohen B, Henn V. 1972. Unit activity in the pontine reticular formation associated with eye movements. Brain Res 46:403–410.
- Colby CL, Duhamel J-R, Goldberg ME. 1996. Visual, presaccadic and cognitive activation of single neurons in monkey lateral intraparietal area. J Neurophysiol 76:2841–2852.
- Cumming BG, Judge SJ. 1986. Disparity-induced and blurinduced convergence eye movement and accommodation in the monkey. J Neurophysiol 55:896–914.
- Mark F. Walker Curtis CE, Connolly JD. 2008. Saccade preparation signals in the human frontal and parietal cortices. J Neurophysiol 99:133–145.
- Dash S, Thier P. 2014. Cerebellum-dependent motor learning: lessons from adaptation of eye movements in primates. Prog Brain Res 210:121–155.
- Demer JL, Miller JM, Poukens V, Vinters HV, Glasgow BJ. 1995. Evidence for fibromuscular pulleys of the recti extraocular muscles. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 36:1125–1136.
- Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1992. The updating of the representation of visual space in parietal cortex by intended eye movements. Science 255:90–92.
- Dürsteler MR, Wurtz RH, Newsome WT. 1987. Directional pursuit deficits following lesions of the foveal representation within the superior temporal sulcus of the macaque
- monkey. J Neurophysiol 57:1262–1287. Fuchs AF, Luschei ES. 1970. Firing patterns of abducens neurons of alert monkeys in relationship to horizontal eye movement. J Neurophysiol 33:382–392.
- Funahashi S, Bruce CJ, Goldman-Rakic PS. 1989. Mnemonic coding of visual space in the monkey's dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol 61:331–349.

20/01/21 11:20 AM

Selected Reading

Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. Attention, intention, and pri-

ority in the parietal lobe. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:1–21.

Krauzlis RJ, Goffart L, Hafed ZM. 2017. Neuronal control of

- fixation and fixational eye movements. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 372:20160205.
- Leigh RJ, Zee DS. 2015. The Neurology of Eye Movements, 6th ed. Philadelphia: FA Davis. Lisberger SG. Visual guidance of smooth-pursuit eye move-
- ments: sensation, action, and what happens in between. Neuron 2010:477–491.
- Sparks D. 2002. The brainstem control of saccadic eye movements. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:952–964. Wurtz RH, Joiner WM, Berman RA. 2011. Neuronal mecha-
- nisms for visual stability: progress and problems. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:492–503.
- Yarbus AL. 1967. Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 881

Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze



Part V / Movement

Gottlieb JP, MacAvoy MG, Bruce CJ. 1994. Neural responses

related to smooth-pursuit eye movements and their cor-

respondence with electrically elicited smooth eye move-

- ments in the primate frontal eye field. J Neurophysiol 74:1634–1653. Hécaen J, de Ajuriaguerra J. 1954. Balint's syndrome (psychic paralysis of visual fixation). Brain 77:373–400. Henn V, Hepp K, Büttner-Ennever JA. 1982. The primate ocu-
- lomotor system. II. Premotor system. A synthesis of anatomical, physiological, and clinical data. Hum Neurobiol
- 12:87–95. Highstein SM, Baker R. 1978. Excitatory termination of abducens internuclear neurons on medial rectus motoneurons: relationship to syndrome of internuclear ophthalmople-
- gia. J Neurophysiol 41:1647–1661. Hikosaka O, Wurtz RH. 1983. Visual and oculomotor functions of monkey substantia nigra pars reticulata. IV. Relation of substantia nigra to superior colliculus. J Neurophysiol
- 49:1285–1301. Hikosaka O, Sakamoto M, Usui S. 1989. Functional properties of monkey caudate neurons. I. Activities related to saccadic eye movements. J Neurophysiol 61:780–798.
- Hikosaka O, Wurtz RH. 1989. The basal ganglia. Rev Oculomotor Res 3: 257–281. Huk A, Dougherty R, Heeger D. 2002. Retinotopy and
- functional subdivision of human areas MT and MST. J Neurosci 22:7195–7205.
- Keller EL. 1974. Participation of medial pontine reticular formation in eye movement generation in monkey. J Neurophysiol 37:316–332.
- Laurutis VP, Robinson DA. 1986. The vestibular reflex during human saccadic eye movements. J Physiol (Lond) 373: 209–233.
- Luschei ES, Fuchs AF. 1972. Activity of brain stem neurons during eye movements of alert monkeys. J Neurophysiol 35:445–461.
- Lynch JC, Graybiel AM, Lobeck LJ. 1985. The differential projection of two cytoarchitectonic subregions of the inferior parietal lobule of macaque upon the deep layers of the
- superior colliculus. J Comp Neurol 235:241–254. McFarland JL, Fuchs AF. 1992. Discharge patterns in nucleus prepositus hypoglossi and adjacent medial vestibular nucleus during horizontal eye movement in behaving
- macaques. J Neurophysiol 68:319–332. Munoz DP, Wurtz RH. 1993. Fixation cells in monkey superior colliculus. I. Characteristics of cell discharge. J Neurophysiol 70:559–575.
- Mustari MJ, Fuchs AF, Wallman J. 1988. Response properties of dorsolateral pontine units during smooth pursuit in the rhesus macaque. J Neurophysiol 60:664–686.

Powell KD, Goldberg ME. 2000. Response of neurons in the

lateral intraparietal area to a distractor flashed during the

delay period of a memory-guided saccade. J Neurophysiol

- 84:301–310. Quaia C, Aizawa H, Optican LM, Wurtz RH. 1998. Revers -ible inactivation of monkey superior colliculus. II. Maps of saccadic deficits. J Neurophysiol 79:2097–2110.
- Quaia C, Lefevre P, Optican LM. 1999. Model of the control of saccades by superior colliculus and cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 82:999–1018.
- Ramat S, Leigh RJ, Zee DS, Optican LM. 2007. What clinical disorders tell us about the neural control of saccadic eye movements. Brain 130:10–35.
- Rao HM, Mayo JP, Sommer MA. 2016. Circuits for presaccadic visual remapping. J Neurophysiol 116:2624–2636. Raybourn MS, Keller EL. 1977. Colliculo-reticular organization

-

- in primate oculomotor system. J Neurophysiol 269:985–988. Robinson DA. 1970. Oculomotor unit behavior in the mon
- key. J Neurophysiol 33:393–404. Schall JD. 1995. Neural basis of saccade target selection. Rev
- Neurosci 6:63–85. Schiller PH, Koerner F. 1971. Discharge characteristics of sin-
- gle units in superior colliculus of the alert rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol 34:920–936.
- Schiller PH, True SD, Conway JL. 1980. Deficits in eye movements following frontal eye field and superior colliculus ablations. J Neurophysiol 44:1175–1189.
- Scudder C, Kaneko C, Fuchs A. 2002. The brainstem burst generator for saccadic eye movements—a modern synthesis. Exp Brain Res 142:439–462.
- Segraves MA, Goldberg ME. 1987. Functional properties of corticotectal neurons in the monkey's frontal eye field. J Neurophysiol 58:1387–1419.
- Silver MA, Kastner S. 2009. Topographic maps in human frontal and parietal cortex. Trends Cogn Sci (Regul Ed) 13: 488–495.
- Strupp M, Kremmyda O, Adamczyk C, et al. 2014. Central ocular motor disorders, including gaze palsy and nystagmus. J Neurol 261:S542–S558.
- Stuphorn V, Brown JW, Schall JD. 2010. Role of supplementary eye field in saccade initiation: executive, not direct, control. J Neurophysiol 103:801–816.
- Takagi M, Zee DS, Tamargo RJ. 1998. Effects of lesions of the oculomotor vermis on eye movements in primate: saccades. J Neurophysiol 80:1911–1931.
- von Noorden GK, Campos EC. 2002. Binocular Vision and Ocular Motility: Theory and Management of Strabismus, 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
- -Wurtz RH, Goldberg ME. 1972. Activity of superior colliculus in behaving monkey. III. Cells discharging before eye movements. J Neurophysiol 35:575–586.
- Newsome WT, Wurtz RH, Komatsu H. 1988. Relation of corti cal areas MT and MST to pursuit eye movements. II. Differentiation of retinal from extraretinal inputs. J Neurophysiol
- 60:604–620. Olson CR, Gettner SN. 1995. Object-centered direction selectivity in the macaque supplementary eye field. Science 269:985–988.

Kandel-Ch35\_0860-0882.indd 882

- Xu-Wilson M, Chen-Harris H, Zee DS, Shadmehr R. 2009. Cerebellar contributions to adaptive control of saccades in humans. J Neurosci 29:12930–12939.
- Zee DS. 1977. Disorders of eye-head coordination. In B Brooks, FJ Bajandas (Eds.), Eye Movements, Plenum Press, New York, 1977, pp. 9–40.

20/01/21 11:20 AM


Posture

Equilibrium and Orientation Underlie Posture Control

Postural Equilibrium Controls the Body's

Center of Mass

## Postural Orientation Anticipates Disturbances to Balance

Postural Responses and Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Use Stereotyped Strategies and Synergies

Automatic Postural Responses Compensate for

## Sudden Disturbances Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for

Voluntary Movement Posture Control Is Integrated With Locomotion

Somatosensory, Vestibular, and Visual Information Must Be Integrated and Interpreted to Maintain Posture

Somatosensory Signals Are Important for Timing and

## Direction of Automatic Postural Responses Vestibular Information Is Important for Balance on

Unstable Surfaces and During Head Movements Visual Inputs Provide the Postural System With

Orientation and Motion Information Information From a Single Sensory Modality

Can Be Ambiguous The Postural Control System Uses a Body Schema That

Incorporates Internal Models for Balance Control of Posture Is Task Dependent

Task Requirements Determine the Role of Each Sensory System in Postural Equilibrium and Orientation

## Control of Posture Is Distributed in the Nervous System

Spinal Cord Circuits Are Sufficient for Maintaining Antigravity Support but Not Balance

## The Brain Stem and Cerebellum Integrate Sensory

Signals for Posture

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 883

The Spinocerebellum and Basal Ganglia Are Important

in Adaptation of Posture

Cerebral Cortex Centers Contribute to Postural Control

Highlights

T

he control of posture involves two inter-

related goals

,

equilibrium (balance) and ori-

entation, crucial for most tasks of daily living.

Balance control maintains the body in stable equilibrium to avoid falls. Orientation aligns the body segments with respect to each other and to the world, such as maintaining the head vertical. Both balance and orientation use several different types of control: automatic postural responses, anticipatory postural adjustments, postural sway in stance, sensory integration for a body schema, orientation to vertical, and dynamic stability during gait. To appreciate the complexity of maintaining balance and orientation, imagine that you are waiting tables on a tour boat. You have a tray full of drinks to

be delivered to a table on the other side of the rolling deck. Even as your mind is occupied with remembering customer orders, unconscious but complex sensorimotor processes for controlling postural orientation and balance allow you to move about in an efficient and coordinated manner without falling. As you cross the rolling deck, your brain rapidly integrates and interprets sensory information and adjusts motor output to maintain your balance and the upright orientation of your head and trunk, as well as stabilize the arm supporting the tray of full glasses. Sudden

19/01/21 4:07 PM
Posture

Equilibrium and Orientation Underlie Posture Control

Postural Equilibrium Controls the Body's

Center of Mass

## Postural Orientation Anticipates Disturbances to Balance

Postural Responses and Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Use Stereotyped Strategies and Synergies

Automatic Postural Responses Compensate for

## Sudden Disturbances Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for

Voluntary Movement Posture Control Is Integrated With Locomotion

Somatosensory, Vestibular, and Visual Information Must Be Integrated and Interpreted to Maintain Posture

Somatosensory Signals Are Important for Timing and

## Direction of Automatic Postural Responses Vestibular Information Is Important for Balance on

Unstable Surfaces and During Head Movements Visual Inputs Provide the Postural System With

Orientation and Motion Information Information From a Single Sensory Modality

Can Be Ambiguous The Postural Control System Uses a Body Schema That

Incorporates Internal Models for Balance Control of Posture Is Task Dependent

Task Requirements Determine the Role of Each Sensory System in Postural Equilibrium and Orientation

## Control of Posture Is Distributed in the Nervous System

Spinal Cord Circuits Are Sufficient for Maintaining Antigravity Support but Not Balance

## The Brain Stem and Cerebellum Integrate Sensory

Signals for Posture

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 883

The Spinocerebellum and Basal Ganglia Are Important

in Adaptation of Posture

Cerebral Cortex Centers Contribute to Postural Control

Highlights

T

he control of posture involves two inter-

related goals

,

equilibrium (balance) and ori-

entation, crucial for most tasks of daily living.

Balance control maintains the body in stable equilibrium to avoid falls. Orientation aligns the body segments with respect to each other and to the world, such as maintaining the head vertical. Both balance and orientation use several different types of control: automatic postural responses, anticipatory postural adjustments, postural sway in stance, sensory integration for a body schema, orientation to vertical, and dynamic stability during gait. To appreciate the complexity of maintaining balance and orientation, imagine that you are waiting tables on a tour boat. You have a tray full of drinks to

be delivered to a table on the other side of the rolling deck. Even as your mind is occupied with remembering customer orders, unconscious but complex sensorimotor processes for controlling postural orientation and balance allow you to move about in an efficient and coordinated manner without falling. As you cross the rolling deck, your brain rapidly integrates and interprets sensory information and adjusts motor output to maintain your balance and the upright orientation of your head and trunk, as well as stabilize the arm supporting the tray of full glasses. Sudden

19/01/21 4:07 PM


Part V / Movement

unexpected motions of the boat evoke automatic pos-

tural responses that prevent falls. Before you reach

out to place a glass on the table, your nervous system

makes anticipatory postural adjustments to maintain your balance. Somatosensory, vestibular, and visual information are integrated to provide a coherent sense of the position and velocity of the body in space with respect to

the support surface, gravity, and visual environment. Since the surface is unstable and vision is not providing earth-stable information, your dependence on vestibular information is greater than usual. Your head is kept stable while your trunk motions and walking pattern adjust for disequilibrium caused by the moving surface. You notice that both your voluntary tasks and your balance control deteriorate when trying to attend to both goals. Equilibrium and Orientation Underlie

Posture Control

## Postural equilibrium refers to the ability to actively stabilize the upper body by resisting external forces act-

ing on the body. Although the dominant external force

affecting equilibrium on earth is gravity, other inertial forces and external perturbations must also be resisted. Depending on the particular task or behavior, different sets of muscles are activated in response to or in anticipation of disturbance to equilibrium. Postural orientation refers to the ability to actively align body segments, such as the trunk and head, with respect to each other and to the environment. Depend-

ing on the particular task or behavior, body segments may be aligned with respect to gravitational vertical, visual vertical, or the support surface. For example, when skiing downhill, the head may be oriented to gravitational and inertial vertical, but not to the visual or support surface references that are inclined. The biomechanical requirements of postural control depend on anatomy and postural orientation and thus vary among species. Nevertheless, in a variety

of species, the control mechanisms for postural equilibrium and orientation have many common features. The sensorimotor mechanisms for postural control are quite similar in humans and quadrupedal mammals even though their habitual stance is different. Postural Equilibrium Controls the Body's Center of Mass

## With many segments linked by joints, the body is mechanically unstable. To maintain balance, the

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 884

nervous system must control the position and motion

of the body's center of mass as well as the body's rota-

tion about it. The center of mass is a point that repre-

sents the average position of the body's total mass. In the standing adult, for example, the center of mass is located about 2 cm in front of the second lumbar ver -tebra; in a young child, it is higher. The location of the center of mass is not fixed but depends on postural orientation. For example, when you flex at the hips while standing, the center of mass moves from a location inside the body to a position outside the body. Although gravity pulls on all body segments, the net effect on body equilibrium acts through the body's center of mass. The force due to gravity

is opposed by the forces between the feet and the ground. Each point on the surface will generate a force on the foot. All the forces acting between the foot and the ground can be summed to yield a single force vector termed the ground reaction force. This origin of the ground reaction force vector on the surface is the point at which the rotational effect of all the forces on the feet are balanced and is termed the center of pressure (Box 36–1). Maintaining balance while standing requires keeping the downward projection of the center of mass within the base of support, an imaginary area defined

by those parts of the body in contact with the environment. For example, the two feet or one foot of a standing human define a base of support (Box 36–1). However, when a standing person leans against a wall or is supported by crutches, the base of support extends from the ground under the feet to the contact point between the body and the wall or crutches. Because the body is always in motion, even during stable stance, the body's center of mass continually moves about with respect to the base of support. Postural instability is determined by how fast the center of mass is accelerating toward and beyond the boundary of its base of support and how close the downward projection of the body's center of mass is to the boundary. Upright stance requires two actions: (1) maintaining support against gravity by keeping the center of mass at some height and joints stable and (2) maintain-

ing balance by controlling the trajectory of the center of mass in the horizontal plane. Balance and antigravity support are controlled separately by the nervous system and may be differentially affected in certain pathological conditions. For example, antigravity support can be excessive when spasticity is present after a stroke or insufficient in the hypotonia of cerebral palsy, although balance control may be preserved. Alternatively, in vestibular disorders, antigravity support can be normal, although balance control is disordered.

19/01/21 4:07 PM

Box 36–1 Center of Pressure

## The center of pressure (CoP) is defined as the origin

of the ground reaction force vector on the support sur-

face. For the body to be in static equilibrium, that is,

to remain motionless, the force caused by gravity and the ground reaction force must be equal and opposite, and the CoP must be directly under the center of mass (CoM) (Figure 36–1A). Misalignment of the CoM and CoP causes motion of the CoM. For example, if the CoM projection onto the base of support is to the right of the CoP, the body will sway to the right until the CoP moves to the right to move the CoM back over the base of support. However, standing is never truly static. While the body is in motion (postural sway), CoM and CoP are not aligned and dynamic equilibrium must maintain bal-

ance (Figure 36–1B). In fact, when the body is unsupported, CoP and CoM are continually in motion and are A

Figure 36–1 The center of mass is controlled by mov-

ing the center of pressure.

rarely aligned, although when averaged over time dur-

ing quiet stance, they are coincident. The sway of the

body during quiet stance can be described by the trajec-

tory of either CoM or CoP over time, such as sway path, area, velocity, and frequency. In more dynamic situations like walking, running, turning, and jumping, stability can be achieved even when the CoM briefly goes outside the base of support.

For example, when standing on one leg or on a narrow beam, momentum from rotating the hips, arms, and other body parts or movement of the CoP can be used to change the direction of the ground reaction force to return the body CoM over its base of support to maintain stability (Figure 36–1B). If the CoM is outside the base of support and heading away from it, subjects may need to take a step or grab a stable object to change the base of support and avoid a fall. B

Ground

reaction

force

Force

plate

rectangle around the feet in contact with the ground) for

equilibrium. The base of support of the standing human is

defined by contact of the feet on the support surface.

B. In a dynamic situation, such as standing on one leg on a narrow beam, equilibrium can be maintained even when the body CoM displacements (gold displacements) go outside of

the base of support for brief periods. Strategies such as counter-rotation of the lower and upper body can tilt the ground reaction force so that it accelerates the body CoM back over its base of support. (Adapted, with permission, from Otten 1999. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)

<!-- image -->

A. The force caused by gravity passes through the center

of mass (CoM) in the trunk. The surface exerts an upward force against each foot, such that the ground reaction

force vector originates at the center of pressure (CoP) on the support surface. Below: Even when the feet remain in place, the CoP (blue displacement) and CoM (gold displacement) are always in motion as we sway. During normal standing on two feet, the projection of the CoM of the body remains within the base of support (light blue

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 885

19/01/21 4:07 PM


Part V / Movement

Antigravity support, or "postural tone," is pro-

vided by the tonic activation of muscles that generate

force against the ground to keep the trunk and limbs

extended and the center of mass at the appropriate height. In humans, much of the support against gravity is provided by passive bone-on-bone forces in joints such as the knees, which can be fully extended during stance, and in stretched ligaments such as those at the front of the hips. Nevertheless, antigravity support in humans also requires active tonic muscle contraction, for example, in ankle, trunk, and neck extensors. Postural tone, however, should not be considered a static state of muscle activation, as can be seen in pathologies such as decerebrate rigidity or the rigidity of parkinsonism. Normal postural tone is constantly changing, as a "wave" or "reed in the wind," to accommodate changes in postural alignment, voluntary movements, and task requirements. Postural tone is not sufficient, however, for maintaining balance. Both bipeds and quadrupeds are inherently unstable, and their bodies sway during

quiet stance. Actively contracted muscles exhibit a spring-like stiffness that helps to resist body sway, but muscle stiffness alone is insufficient for maintaining balance. Even stiffening of the limbs through muscle cocontraction is not sufficient for balance control. Instead, complex patterns of muscle activation produce direction-specific forces to control the body's center of mass. Body sway caused by even subtle movements, such as the motion of the chest during breathing, is actively counteracted by alterations in postural tone. Postural Orientation Anticipates Disturbances to Balance

## Postural orientation is the manner in which body parts are aligned with respect to each other and to the envi-

ronment. Animals arrange their bodies to accomplish

specific tasks efficiently. Although this postural orientation interacts with balance control, the two systems can act independently. For example, soccer goalies may orient their body to intercept a ball by sacrificing the goal of maintaining balance. In contrast, a patient with Parkinson disease or thoracic kyphosis may use an inefficient, flexed postural alignment to maintain effective control of balance while standing. The energy needed to maintain body position over a period of time can influence postural orientation. In humans, for example, the upright orientation of the

trunk with respect to gravity minimizes the forces and thus the energy required to hold the body's center of mass over the base of support. Task requirements also affect postural orientation. For some tasks, it is

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 886

important to stabilize the arrangement of the body in

space, whereas for others, it is necessary to stabilize

one body part with respect to another. When walking

while carrying a full glass, for example, it is important to stabilize the hand against gravity to prevent spillage. In contrast, when walking while reading a cell phone, the hand must be stabilized with respect to the head and eyes to maintain visual acuity. Subjects may adopt a particular postural orientation to optimize the accuracy of sensory signals regarding body motion. For example, when standing and

walking inside a ship, in which the surface and visual references may be unstable, information about earth vertical is derived primarily from vestibular inputs. A person often aligns his head with respect to gravitational vertical when balancing on an unstable surface because the perception of vertical is most accurate when the head is upright and stable. Anticipatory alterations of habitual body orientation can minimize the effect of a possible disturbance. For example, people often lean in the direction of an

anticipated external force, or they flex their knees, widen their stance, and extend their arms when anticipating that stability will be compromised. Postural Responses and Anticipatory

Postural Adjustments Use Stereotyped

Strategies and Synergies

## When a sudden disturbance causes the body to sway, various postural motor strategies are used to main-

tain the center of mass within the base of support. In

one strategy, the base of support remains fixed relative to the support surface: While the feet remain in place, the body rotates about the ankles back to the upright position (Figure 36–2A). In other strategies, the base of support is moved or enlarged, for example, by taking a step or by grabbing a support with the hand (Figure 36–2B). Older views of motor control focused on trunk and proximal limb muscles as the main postural effectors. Recent behavioral studies show that any group

of muscles from the neck and trunk, legs and arms, or feet and hands can act as postural muscles depending on the body parts in contact with the environment and the biomechanical requirements of equilibrium. When studying the posture control system, scientists disrupt balance in a controlled manner to determine the subject's automatic postural response.

This response is described by the ground reaction force vector, the motion of the center of pressure, and movements of parts of the body. The electrical activity

19/01/21 4:07 PM

Figure 36–2 Automatic postural responses

keep the center of mass within the base of

support.

A. One postural strategy for regaining balance is to bring the center of mass back to its origin over the base of support. When the platform on which

a subject is standing is suddenly moved backward, the body sways forward and the projection of the center of mass moves toward the toes. During recovery, the body actively exerts force into the surface about the ankles, bringing the center of mass back to the original position over the feet. B. An alternative postural strategy enlarges the base of support to keep the center of mass within the base. A disturbance causes the subject to Chapter 36 / Posture


A Bringing center of mass back over base of support


Surface moves

2 Body sways

backward

3 Recovery

forward

B Extending base of support to capture center of mass

sway forward and the center of mass moves toward the boundary of the base of support (blue area on the ground). The base can be enlarged in two ways: taking a step and placing the foot in front of the center of mass to decelerate the body's motion, or grabbing a support and thereby extending the base to include the contact point between the hand and support.


Disturbance

2 Responses

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

of many muscles is recorded by electromyography Using arm for support

(tibialis anterior), which itself is shortened by the sur-

(EMG), which reflects the firing of alpha motor neu-

rons that innervate skeletal muscle and thus provides

a window into the nervous system's output for balance control. The combination of all these measurements allows investigators to infer the active neural processes underlying balance control. Automatic Postural Responses Compensate for Sudden Disturbances

## An automatic postural response to a sudden disturbance is not a simple stretch reflex but rather the

synergistic activation of a group of muscles in a charac-

teristic sequence with the goal of maintaining equilibrium. That is, the recruitment of a muscle for a postural response serves the requirements of equilibrium and is not a reflexive change in the muscle's length caused by the disturbance. For example, when the surface under a person is rotated in the toes-up direction, the ankle extensor (gastrocnemius) is lengthened and a small stretch reflex may occur. However, the postural response for balance recruits the antagonist ankle flexor

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 887

face rotation, while suppressing the stretch response in

the gastrocnemius. In contrast, when the platform is

moved backward, the gastrocnemius is again lengthened but now it is recruited for the postural response, as evidenced by a second burst of EMG activity after the stretch reflex. Thus, the initial change in length of a muscle induced by perturbation does not determine whether that muscle is recruited for postural control, and stretch reflexes are not the basis for postural control. In fact, monosynaptic stretch reflexes are too weak to move the body center of mass effectively, and very often, the postural muscles activated to recover equilibrium have not been stretched. Automatic postural responses to sudden disturbances have characteristic temporal and spatial features. A postural response in muscles must be recruited

rapidly following the onset of a disturbance. Sudden movement of the support surface under a standing cat evokes EMG activity within 40 to 60 ms (Figure 36–3). Humans have longer latencies of postural response (90–120 ms in the ankle muscles); the increased delay is attributed to the larger body size of humans and thus

19/01/21 4:07 PM


Part V / Movement

Quiet Passive

stance displacement Active response Balance restored the greater signal conduction distances from sensory receptors to the central nervous system and thence to leg muscles. The latency of automatic postural responses is shorter than voluntary reaction time but longer than the monosynaptic stretch reflex. Postural responses involving a change in support base, such as stepping, have even longer latencies than those that occur when the feet remain in place.

<!-- image -->

A

P

A

P

A

P

50 µV The longer time presumably affords greater flexibility in the commands transmitted by long loops through the cortex; for example, the choice of foot to begin the step, the direction of the step, and the path of the step around obstacles. Activation of postural muscles results in contraction and the development of force in the muscles, leading to torque (rotational force) at the joints. The net

5 cm/s 2.5 cm 1 N result is an active response, the ground reaction force (Box 36–1), that restores the center of mass to its original position over the base of support (Figure 36–3). The delay between EMG activation and the active response, approximately 30 ms in the cat and 50 ms in humans, reflects the excitation–contraction coupling time of each muscle as well as the compliance of the musculoskeletal system. The amplitude of EMG activity in a particular muscle depends on both the speed and direction of postural disturbance. The amplitude increases as the speed of a mov-

4.0 cm 0.25 g able platform under a standing human or cat increases, and it varies in a monotonic fashion as the direction of platform motion is varied systematically. Each muscle responds to a limited set of perturbation directions with a characteristic tuning curve (Figure 36–4). Although individual muscles have unique directional tuning curves, muscles are not activated independently but instead are activated together in

a characteristic latency. Anterior motion of the platform evokes

an EMG response in the hip extensor muscle (anterior biceps femoris) of a cat approximately 40 ms after the onset of platform acceleration (100 ms in a human). This latency is stereotyped and repeatable across subjects and is approximately four times as long as that of the monosynaptic stretch reflex. As the platform moves, the paws are carried forward and the trunk remains behind owing to inertia, causing the center of mass to move backward with increasing velocity with respect to the platform. The velocity of the center of mass peaks and then decreases as the horizontal component of the ground reaction force (GRFh) increases following muscle activation. The delay of approximately 30 ms between the onset of EMG activity and the onset of the active response reflects excitation–contraction coupling and musculoskeletal compliance. The automatic postural response extends the hind limb, propelling the trunk forward and restoring the position of the center of mass with respect to the paws. (Abbreviations: A, anterior; P, posterior.) (Data from J. Macpherson.)

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 888

synergies, with characteristic time delays. The muscles within a synergy receive a common command signal during postural responses. In this way, the many muscles of the body are controlled by just a few signals, reducing the time needed to compute the appropriate postural response (Box 36–2). The set of muscles recruited in a postural response to a disturbance depends on the body's initial stance. The same disturbance elicits very different postural

responses in someone standing unaided, standing while grasping a stable support, or crouching on all four limbs. For example, forward sway activates muscles in the back of the legs and trunk during upright free stance. When the subject is holding onto a stable support, muscles of the arms rather than those of the legs are activated first. When the subject is crouched on toes and fingers, like a cat, muscles in the front of the legs and in the arms are activated (Figure 36–6A).

19/01/21 4:07 PM

Figure 36–4 Automatic postural

responses have stereotypical direc-

tional characteristics. (Adapted from

Macpherson 1988.) A. The gluteus medius muscle in the cat, a hip extensor and abductor, responds to a range of directions of

motion in the horizontal plane. The electromyographic (EMG) records shown here are from a cat standing on a platform that was moved in the horizontal plane in each of 16 evenly spaced directions. The gluteus medius muscle of the left hind limb was activated by motion in several directions (pink) and inhibited in the remaining directions (gray). The dashed vertical lines indicate the onset of platform acceleration. In the center is a polar plot of the amplitude of EMG activity versus the direction of motion during the automatic postural response; it represents a directional tuning curve for the muscle. EMG amplitude was computed from the area under the curve during the first 80 ms of the response. B. Every muscle has a characteristic directional tuning curve that differs from that of other muscles, even if they

- have similar actions. The middle biceps femoris and cranial semimembranosus, for example, are both extensors of the hip.

Because postural responses are influenced by Chapter 36 / Posture


A Directional tuning of postural responses for a single muscle

Gluteus medius

<!-- image -->

recent experience, they adapt only gradually to new

biomechanical conditions. When forward sway is

induced by backward motion of a platform on which a subject is standing, the posterior muscles of the ankle, knee, and hip are activated in sequence beginning 90 ms after the platform starts moving. This postural response, the ankle strategy, restores balance primarily by rotating the body about the ankle joints. However, when forward sway is induced by backward motion of a narrow beam, it is impossible to use surface torque alone to recover equilibrium and the anterior muscles of the hip and trunk are activated. This postural response, the hip strategy, restores the body's center of mass by bending forward at the hip joints and counterrotating at the ankles (Figure 36–6B). When a subject moves from standing on a wide platform to a narrow beam, she or he persists in using the ankle strategy in the first few trials. This strategy

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 889

semimembranosus

does not work when standing on the beam, and the

subject falls. Over several trials, the subject will gradu-

ally switch to using the hip strategy. Similarly, moving

from the beam back to the platform requires several trials to adapt the postural response back to the ankle strategy (Figure 36–6C). Although sensory stimulation changes immediately after subjects move from the beam to the floor, the postural response adjusts gradually as it is tuned for opti-

mal behavior by trial and error. If postural responses were simple reflexes, they would change immediately upon a change in sensory drive. Trial-to-trial changes in postural behavior generally occur at the subconscious level (implicit learning) and involve updating of the body schema and internal model of the world within the right parietal cortex. This body schema is dynamic, as it is constantly updated based on experience. Postural responses not only improve with practice, but the improvements are retained, a sign of motor

19/01/21 4:07 PM

Box 36–2 Synergistic Activation of Muscles

## Coordinated movements require precise control of the many joints and muscles in the body. Maintaining con-

trol is biomechanically complex, in part because different

combinations of joint rotations and muscle activations can achieve the same goal. Such redundancy confers great flexibility, for example, in modifying stepping patterns to negotiate obstacles in our path, but comes at the cost of increased complexity in the brain's computation of movement trajectories and forces. Many factors must be included in the computation of movement commands, including the effect of external forces such as gravity and the forces that one body

segment exerts on another during motion. All these factors come into play when the brain computes postural responses to sudden disturbances, but with the added constraint of a time limit on computation: Responses must occur within a certain time or balance will be lost. It has long been believed that the brain simplifies the control of movement by grouping control variables, for example, activating several muscles together. Using math-

ematical techniques that parse complex data into a small number of components, one can determine that only four synergies are needed to account for the vast majority of

Goal Muscle synergy activation patterns of 13 muscles of the human leg and trunk during automatic postural responses to many direc- tions of platform motion (Figure 36–5). Activation of each synergy produces a unique direction of force against the ground, suggesting that postural control is based on taskrelated variables such as the force between foot and ground rather than the contraction force of individual muscles. Like the arrangement of notes in a musical chord, each muscle synergy specifies the timing and amplitude of activation for a particular muscle together with oth- ers. Just as one note belongs to several different chords, each muscle belongs to more than one synergy. When several chords are played simultaneously, the chord structure is no longer evident in the multitude of notes. Similarly, when several synergies are activated concurrently, the observed muscle pattern gives the appearance of unstructured complexity, but a particular muscle's activation is the result of the systematic addition of synergy commands. Concurrent activation of synergies simplifies the neural command signals for movement as only a few central commands are required instead of a separate command for each muscle, while allowing flexibility and adaptability to postural control.

Recruitment coefcient


lated into specific muscle activity patterns. Each muscle synergy activates a group of muscles in a fixed proportion (colored bars) to produce the mechanical output needed to achieve a postural goal. The height of each bar

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 890

Front

represents the relative amount of activation, or weighting,

for each muscle (1–13). Each synergy is activated more or

less at particular times during a behavior driven by central

commands and sensory drive (recruitment function). For example, different postural synergies are activated for different directions of falling. (Abbreviation: CoM, center of mass.) (Reproduced, with permission, from L. Ting.)


19/01/21 4:07 PM

A Stance determines postural response

<!-- image -->

B Platform width affects postural response

Hip strategy

200 300

200 300

C Adaptation of postural response

QUAD

<!-- image -->

Figure 36–6 Automatic postural responses change with

<!-- image -->

biomechanical conditions.

A. The backward movement of a platform activates different

groups of muscles depending on initial stance. Gray stick figures show initial positions (upright unsupported, quadru-

pedal, or upright supported). The muscles activated in each postural response are shown in red. (Adapted, with permission, from Dunbar et al. 1986.) B. When a subject stands on a narrow beam that is abruptly moved backward, the anterior muscles—abdominals (ABD) and quadriceps (QUAD)—are recruited to flex the trunk and

extend the ankles, moving the hips backward (the hip strategy). When the subject instead stands on a wide platform that is moved backward, his posterior muscles—paraspinals (PSP), hamstrings (HAM), and gastrocnemius (GAS)—are activated

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 891

to bring the body back to the erect position by rotating at the

ankles (the ankle strategy). Muscles representative of dif-

ferent postural responses are highlighted in color. Dashed

vertical lines in the plots indicate onset of platform (or beam) acceleration. C. Postural strategy adapts after the subject moves from the narrow beam onto the wide platform. On the beam, the quadriceps are activated and the hamstrings are silent; after adaptation to

the wide platform, the reverse is observed. The transition from quadriceps to hamstrings activation occurs over a series of trials; the activity in the quadriceps gradually decreases in amplitude, whereas the hamstrings are activated earlier and earlier until, by trial 8, quadriceps activity disappears altogether. Ankle and trunk muscles show similar patterns of adaptation. (B. and C, adapted, with permission, from Horak and Nashner 1986.)

19/01/21 4:07 PM

Chapter 36 / Posture

Hip strategy

(on beam)

Move to

wide platform

Adaptation over

successive trials

on wide platform

Ankle strategy

(on platform)



Part V / Movement

Figure 36–7 Postural responses can be

learned and retained with practice.

A. Displacement of body center mass

(CoM , gold oscillation) in response to forward and backward platform oscilla-

tions of varying amplitudes (gray) as a healthy subject learns to reduce postural instability. B. Displacement of the body CoM by forward–backward surface oscillations is reduced across training sessions on

day 1, and this improvement is retained on day 2 in healthy control subjects. People with multiple sclerosis also learn to reduce CoM displacements but do not retain this improvement the next day. The mean and standard error of group changes in gain (CoM/surface displacement) are compared. (Adapted, with permission, from Gera et al. 2016.)

learning. For example, when subjects practice stand-

Forward



<!-- image -->

ing on an oscillating surface, they gradually learn to

decrease the extent of the displacement of their center

of mass, and much of this improvement is retained the next day (Figure 36–7). Patients with neurological disorders, such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinson disease, who have significantly impaired postural responses can often learn to improve their postural control with practice, although they may need more practice than normal to retain the improvements (Figure 36–7). Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for Voluntary Movement

## Voluntary movements can also destabilize postural orientation and equilibrium. For example, rapidly lifting the arms forward while standing produces forces

that extend the hips, flex the knees, and dorsiflex the ankles, moving the body's center of mass forward relative to the feet. The nervous system has advance knowledge of the effects of voluntary movement on postural alignment and stability and activates anticipatory postural adjustments, often in advance of the primary movement (Figure 36–8A). Anticipatory postural adjustments are specific to biomechanical conditions. When a freely standing subject rapidly pulls on a handle fixed to the wall, the

leg muscles (gastrocnemius and hamstrings) are activated before the arm muscles (Figure 36–8B). When the

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 892

Platform

Body CoM

subject performs the same pull while his shoulders are

propped against a rigid bar, no anticipatory leg muscle

activity occurs because the nervous system relies on

the support of the bar to prevent the body from moving forward. When the handle is pulled in response to an external cue, the arm muscles are activated faster in the supported condition than in the freestanding condition. Thus, voluntary arm muscle activation is normally delayed when the task requires active postural stability. Another common preparatory postural adjustment occurs when one begins to walk. The center of mass is accelerated forward and laterally by the unweight-

ing of one leg. This postural adjustment appears to be independent of the stepping program that underlies ongoing locomotion (Chapter 33). Similarly, a forward shift of the center of mass precedes the act of standing on the toes. A subject is unable to remain standing on his toes if he simply activates the calf muscles without moving his center of mass forward; he rises onto his toes only momentarily before gravity restores a flatfooted stance. Moving the center of mass forward over the toes before activating the calf muscles aligns it over the anticipated base of support and thus stabilizes the toe stance. Postural equilibrium during voluntary movement requires control not only of the position and motion of the body's center of mass but also of the angu-

lar momentum about the center of mass. A diver can

19/01/21 4:07 PM

A
Part V / Movement

Figure 36–7 Postural responses can be

learned and retained with practice.

A. Displacement of body center mass

(CoM , gold oscillation) in response to forward and backward platform oscilla-

tions of varying amplitudes (gray) as a healthy subject learns to reduce postural instability. B. Displacement of the body CoM by forward–backward surface oscillations is reduced across training sessions on

day 1, and this improvement is retained on day 2 in healthy control subjects. People with multiple sclerosis also learn to reduce CoM displacements but do not retain this improvement the next day. The mean and standard error of group changes in gain (CoM/surface displacement) are compared. (Adapted, with permission, from Gera et al. 2016.)

learning. For example, when subjects practice stand-

Forward



<!-- image -->

ing on an oscillating surface, they gradually learn to

decrease the extent of the displacement of their center

of mass, and much of this improvement is retained the next day (Figure 36–7). Patients with neurological disorders, such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinson disease, who have significantly impaired postural responses can often learn to improve their postural control with practice, although they may need more practice than normal to retain the improvements (Figure 36–7). Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for Voluntary Movement

## Voluntary movements can also destabilize postural orientation and equilibrium. For example, rapidly lifting the arms forward while standing produces forces

that extend the hips, flex the knees, and dorsiflex the ankles, moving the body's center of mass forward relative to the feet. The nervous system has advance knowledge of the effects of voluntary movement on postural alignment and stability and activates anticipatory postural adjustments, often in advance of the primary movement (Figure 36–8A). Anticipatory postural adjustments are specific to biomechanical conditions. When a freely standing subject rapidly pulls on a handle fixed to the wall, the

leg muscles (gastrocnemius and hamstrings) are activated before the arm muscles (Figure 36–8B). When the

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 892

Platform

Body CoM

subject performs the same pull while his shoulders are

propped against a rigid bar, no anticipatory leg muscle

activity occurs because the nervous system relies on

the support of the bar to prevent the body from moving forward. When the handle is pulled in response to an external cue, the arm muscles are activated faster in the supported condition than in the freestanding condition. Thus, voluntary arm muscle activation is normally delayed when the task requires active postural stability. Another common preparatory postural adjustment occurs when one begins to walk. The center of mass is accelerated forward and laterally by the unweight-

ing of one leg. This postural adjustment appears to be independent of the stepping program that underlies ongoing locomotion (Chapter 33). Similarly, a forward shift of the center of mass precedes the act of standing on the toes. A subject is unable to remain standing on his toes if he simply activates the calf muscles without moving his center of mass forward; he rises onto his toes only momentarily before gravity restores a flatfooted stance. Moving the center of mass forward over the toes before activating the calf muscles aligns it over the anticipated base of support and thus stabilizes the toe stance. Postural equilibrium during voluntary movement requires control not only of the position and motion of the body's center of mass but also of the angu-

lar momentum about the center of mass. A diver can

19/01/21 4:07 PM

A

A Ankle force precedes pulling force during

voluntary arm pull

100 rce (%)

fo

<!-- image -->

95% MPF

5%

0 1 0.5

walking by foot placement Foot placement during stepping CoM at time of:

4 Limb support

Right heel down

(step 4)

Right toe off

(step 2)

Left heel down

(step 3)

Left toe off

(step 1)

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 893


BIC

<!-- image -->

Rigid support

Figure 36–8 Anticipatory postural adjustments precede

voluntary movement.

A. The postural component of a voluntary arm pull increases in

amplitude and lead time as the pulling force increases. In this experiment, subjects were asked to pull on a handle attached to

the wall by a wire. Subjects stood on a force plate and, at a signal, pulled rapidly on the handle to reach a specified peak force varying between 5% and 95% of maximum pulling force. Each pull was preceded by leg muscle activation that produced a rotational force, or torque, about the ankle joints. The larger the pulling force, the larger and earlier was the ankle torque. Traces are aligned at the onset of the pulling force on the handle at time zero. (Abbreviation: MPF, maximum pulling force.) (Adapted, with permission, from Lee, Michaels, and Pai 1990.) B. Postural adjustments accompany voluntary movement only when needed. As in part A, subjects were asked to pull on a handle fixed to a wall. Electromyogram traces are aligned at time zero, the onset

of activity in the arm muscle (biceps brachii, BIC). During unsupported stance, the leg muscles—hamstrings (HAM) and gastrocnemius (GAS)—are activated prior to the arm muscle to prevent the body from rotating forward during the arm pull. The red arrow shows the onset of leg gastrocnemius activation, the gray arrow that of the arm biceps brachii. When the subject was supported by a rigid bar at the shoulder, the anticipatory leg muscle activity was not necessary because the body could not rotate forward. Arm activation was earlier when anticipatory postural muscle activity was not needed. Shaded areas indicate anticipatory postural responses (red) and the initial arm muscle activation (brown). (Adapted, with permission, from Cordo and Nashner 1982.) C. During walking, the trajectory of the center of mass (CoM) is controlled by foot placement. The body's center of mass is between the feet, moving forward and from side to side as the subject walks

forward. When the body is supported by only one leg (single support phase), the CoM is outside the base of support and moves toward the lifting limb. People do not fall while walking because the placement of the foot on the next step decelerates the CoM and propels it back toward the midline. (Adapted from MacKinnon and Winter 1993.)

19/01/21 4:07 PM

Chapter 36 / Posture

B Postural muscles are recruited only when needed

Unsupported stance BIC



Part V / Movement

perform elaborate rolls and twists of the body about

the center of mass while airborne, although the trajec-

tory of his center of mass is fixed once he leaves the

board. During voluntary movements, postural adjustments control the body's angular momentum by anticipating rotational forces. Posture Control Is Integrated With Locomotion

During walking and running, the body is in a constant

## state of falling as the center of mass moves forward

and laterally toward the leg that is in the swing phase

(Figure 36–8C). During walking, the center of mass is within the base of support only when both feet are on the ground, the double stance phase, which is only one-third of a gait cycle. When one foot is supporting the body, the center of mass moves forward in front of the foot, always medial to the base of support. Falling is prevented during walking and running by moving the base of support forward and laterally under the falling center of mass. Postural equilibrium

during gait relies on the placement of each step to control the speed and trajectory of the center of mass. The nervous system plans foot placement several steps in advance using visual information about the terrain and surrounding environment. The main postural challenge during walking is controlling the center of mass of the upper body over the moving legs, especially in the lateral direction. Exces-

sive lateral displacement of the trunk and excessive lateral foot placement variability are signs of postural instability during locomotion. Patients with abnormal postural stability during gait may nevertheless exhibit normal automatic and anticipatory postural adjustments, postural sway in stance under different sensory conditions, and orientation to vertical, suggesting that postural control and gait have different nervous system circuits. Somatosensory, Vestibular, and Visual

Information Must Be Integrated and

Interpreted to Maintain Posture

## Because information about motion from any one sensory system may be ambiguous, multiple modalities must

be integrated in postural centers to determine what

orientation and motion of the body are appropriate. The influence of any one modality on the postural control system varies according to the task and biomechanical conditions. According to prevailing theory, sensory modalities are integrated to form an internal representation of the

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 894

body housed within the parietal cortex that the nerv-

ous system uses to plan and execute motor behaviors.

Over time, this internal representation must adapt to

changes associated with early development, aging, and injury. Somatosensory Signals Are Important for Timing and Direction of Automatic Postural Responses

## Many types of somatosensory fibers trigger and shape the automatic postural response. The largest fibers,

those in group I (12–20 μm in diameter), appear to be

essential for normal response latencies. The longer latency, slower rise time, and lower amplitude of the EMG response following destruction of the group I fibers reflect a loss of acceleration information encoded by muscle spindle primary receptors (Figure 36–9A). The largest and most rapidly conducting sensory fibers are the Ia afferents from muscle spindles and Ib afferents from Golgi tendon organs, as well as some fibers from cutaneous mechanoreceptors (Chapter 18). Group I fibers provide rapid information about the biomechanics of the body including responses to muscle stretch, muscle force, and directionally specific pressure on the foot soles. However, group II fibers from muscle spindles and cutaneous receptors may also play a role in shaping automatic postural responses. Although they may be too slow to generate the earliest part of the response, they likely encode center of mass velocity and position. Both proprioceptive and cutaneous inputs provide cues about postural orientation. During upright stance, for example, muscles lengthen and shorten as

the body sways under the force of gravity, generating proprioceptive signals related to load, muscle length, and velocity of stretch. Joint receptors may detect compressive forces on the joints, whereas cutaneous receptors in the sole of the foot respond to motion of the center of pressure and to changes in ground reaction force angle as the body sways. Pressure receptors near the kidneys are sensitive to gravity (somatic graviception) and are used by the nervous system to help detect upright or tilted postures. All of these signals contribute to the neural map of the position of body segments with respect to each other and the platform surface and may contribute to the neural computation of center of mass motion. The large-diameter, fast somatosensory fibers from muscle spindles are critical for maintaining balance during stance. When these axons die, as occurs

in some forms of peripheral neuropathy, automatic postural responses to movement of a platform are delayed, retarding the ground reaction force. As a

19/01/21 4:07 PM

A Delay in postural response Large-diameter afferents

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 895

1 mV

Chapter 36 / Posture


result, the center of mass moves faster and farther from

the initial position and takes longer to return (Figure

36–9). Because it is more likely that the center of mass

will move outside the base of support, balance is precarious and a fall may occur. Accordingly, individuals with large-fiber peripheral neuropathy in the legs experience ataxia and difficulties with balance. Vestibular Information Is Important for Balance on Unstable Surfaces and During Head Movements

## The otolithic organs of the vestibular apparatus provide information about the direction of gravity, whereas the semicircular canals measure the velocity of head rota-

tion (Chapter 27). Vestibular information thus informs the nervous system about how much the body is tilted with respect to gravity as well as whether it is swaying forward, backward, or sideways. Somatosensory and vestibular information about the gravitational angle of the body is combined to orient the body with respect to gravity and other inertial

Control Large-diameter afferents destroyed forces. To maintain balance while riding a bike in a circular path at high speed, for example, the body and bike must be oriented with respect to a combination of gravitational and centripetal forces (Figure 36–10A). Unlike somatosensory inputs, vestibular signals are not essential for the normal timing of balance reactions. Instead, they influence the directional tuning of a

8 cm/s 1 N Figure 36–9 (Left) Loss of large-diameter somatosensory fibers delays automatic postural responses. Electromyopostural response by providing information about the orientation of the body relative to gravity. In humans and experimental animals lacking functional vestibular afferent pathways, the postural response to angular motion or tilt of the support surface is opposite to the

grams (EMGs) of postural responses to horizontal motion of

2 cm 4 cm a moveable platform were recorded in a cat before and after destruction of the large-diameter (group I) somatosensory fibers throughout the body by vitamin B 6 intoxication. Motor neurons and muscle strength are not affected by the loss of the somatosensory fibers, but afferent information about muscle length and force is diminished. (Reproduced, with permission, from J. Macpherson.) A. The postural response in the gluteus medius evoked by horizontal motion of the support platform is significantly delayed after destruction of group I fibers. This delay of approximately

0.2 g 20 ms induces ataxia and difficulty in maintaining balance. B. Destruction of group I fibers delays activation of the hind limb. This delay slows the restoration of the center of mass (CoM) and the recovery of balance following platform displace-

ment. The delay in onset of the horizontal component of the ground reaction force (GRFh) results in a greater peak displacement of the CoM and a delay in its return to its origin relative to the paws.

19/01/21 4:07 PM


Part V / Movement

A Orienting to gravito-inertial force

various external reference frames.

A. When traveling at high speed along a curved path, a cyclist B Orienting to rotating visual eld B. The postural system can interpret rightward rotation of objects occupying a large region of the visual field as the body tilting to the left. In compensation for this illusion of motion, the

<!-- image -->

orients to the gravito-inertial force (angle A), the vector sum of the force caused by gravity and the centripetal force caused

<!-- image -->

by acceleration along the curved path. (Used, with permission, from Joseph Daniel, Story Arts Media, LLC. Previously published in McMahon and Bonner 1983.) normal response. Rather than resisting the tilt, subjects lacking vestibular signals do the opposite and accen-

tuate the tilt through their own muscular activity. In

contrast, the response to horizontal translation motion of a platform has the appropriate directional tuning and latency, even in the acute stage prior to vestibular compensation. Why does the absence of vestibular signals cause difficulty with tilt but not with linear motion? The answer lies in how the nervous system determines

the direction of vertical. Gravity is the main force that causes the body to fall. As the support surface tilts, healthy subjects orient to gravity using vestibular information to remain upright. In contrast, subjects without vestibular function use somatosensory inputs to orient themselves to the support surface and consequently fall downhill as the surface tilts. During linear motion, however, gravitational and surface vertical are collinear, and somatosensory signals are sufficient to compute the correct postural response. Although visual inputs also provide a vertical reference, visual

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 896

subject tilts to the right, adopting a new postural vertical orientation that is driven by the visual system. The red dashed line indicates gravitational vertical. (Adapted, with permission, from Brandt, Paulus, and Straube 1986.) processing is too slow to participate in the automatic

postural response to rapid tilt, especially soon after the

loss of vestibular function.

Without vestibular information, the response to linear motion of the support surface is larger than normal (hypermetria), leading to overbalancing and insta-

bility. Hypermetria is a major cause of ataxia when vestibular information is lost. Vestibular hypermetria may result from reduced cerebellar inhibition of the motor system, for the loss of vestibular inputs reduces the drive to the inhibitory Purkinje cells. Humans and cats are quite ataxic immediately after loss of the vestibular apparatus. The head and trunk show marked instability, stance and gait are

broad-based, and walking follows a weaving path with frequent falling. Instability is especially great on turning the head, probably because trunk motion cannot be distinguished from head motion using somatosensory information alone. Cats and humans lacking vestibular inputs produce motor output that results in them actively pushing themselves toward the side of

19/01/21 4:08 PM

a voluntary head turn, likely because somatosensory

inputs that encode trunk and head motion are mis-

interpreted in the absence of vestibular inputs. The

postural system erroneously senses that the body is falling to the side away from the head tilt and generates a response in the opposite direction, resulting in imbalance. Immediately following vestibular loss, neck muscles are abnormally activated during ordinary movements and often the head and trunk are moved

together as a unit. After several months, routine movement becomes more normal through vestibular compensation, which may involve greater reliance on the remaining sensory information. However, more challenging tasks are hampered by a residual hypermetria, stiffness in head–trunk control, and instability, especially when visual and somatosensory information is unavailable for postural orientation. Vestibular information is critical for balance when visual information is reduced and the support surface is not stable, for example, at night on a sandy beach or on a boat deck. Visual Inputs Provide the Postural System With Orientation and Motion Information

## Vision reduces body sway when standing still and provides stabilizing cues, especially when a new balanc-

ing task is attempted or balance is precarious. Skaters

and dancers maintain stability while spinning by fixing their gaze on a point in the visual field. However, visual processing is too slow to significantly affect the postural response to a sudden and unexpected disturbance of balance. Vision does play an important role in anticipatory postural adjustments during voluntary movements, such as planning where to place the feet when walking over obstacles. Vision can have a powerful influence on postural orientation, evident when watching a movie scene filmed from the perspective of a moving viewer and

projected on a large screen. Simulated rides in a roller coaster or airplane can induce strong sensations of motion along with activation of postural muscles. An illusion of movement is induced when sufficiently large regions of the visual field are stimulated, as when a large disk in front of a standing subject is rotated. The subject responds to this illusion by tilting his body; clockwise rotation of the visual field is interpreted by the postural system as the body falling to the left, to which the subject compensates by leaning to the right (Figure 36–10B). The rate and direction of optic flow— the flow of images across the retina as people move about—provide clues about body orientation and movement.

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 897

Chapter 36 / Posture


Information From a Single Sensory Modality Can

Be Ambiguous

## Any one sensory modality alone may provide ambiguous information about postural orientation and body motion. The visual system, for example, cannot dis-

tinguish self-motion from object motion. We have all experienced the fleeting sensation while sitting in a stationary vehicle of not knowing whether we are moving or the adjacent vehicle is moving. Vestibular information can also be ambiguous for two reasons. First, vestibular receptors are located in the head and therefore provide information about accelera-

tion of the head but not about the rest of the body. The postural control system cannot use vestibular information alone to distinguish between the head tilting on a stationary trunk and the whole body tilting by rotation at the ankles, both of which activate the semicir -cular canals and otolith organs. Additional information from somatosensory receptors is required to resolve this ambiguity. The otolith organs also cannot distinguish between acceleration owing to gravity and linear acceleration of the head. Tilting to the left, for example, can produce the same otolithic stimulation as acceleration of the body to the right (Figure 36–11). Studies suggest that there are neural circuits that can disambiguate the head-tilt component of a linear acceleration by using a combination of canal and

otolith inputs. Output from this circuit may allow the postural system to determine the orientation of gravity relative to the head regardless of head position and motion. The distinction between tilt and linear motion is especially important while standing on an unstable or a tilting surface. Somatosensory inputs may also provide ambiguous information about body orientation and motion. When we stand upright, mechanoreceptors in the soles

of our feet and proprioceptors in muscles and joints signal the motion of our body relative to the support surface. But somatosensory inputs alone cannot distinguish between body and surface motion, for example, whether ankle flexion stems from forward body sway or tilting of the surface. Our common experience is that the ground beneath us is stable and that somatosensory inputs reflect movements of the body's center of mass as we sway. But surfaces may move relative to the earth, such as a boat's deck, or may be pliant under our weight, like a soft or spongy surface. Therefore, somatosensory information must be integrated with vestibular and visual inputs to give the nervous system an accurate picture of the stability and inclination of the support surface and of our body's relationship to earth vertical.

19/01/21 4:08 PM


Part V / Movement

Fg

<!-- image -->

a

<!-- image -->

Increased ring

Subject tilts head left Increased ring of afferents Subject is moved right

<!-- image -->

Figure 36–11 Vestibular inputs regarding body posture and

<!-- image -->

motion can be ambiguous.  The postural system cannot dis-

<!-- image -->

tinguish between tilt and linear acceleration of the body based

on otolith inputs alone. The mechanoreceptors of the vestibular system are hair bundles that bend in response to shearing forces, thus changing the firing rate of the tonically active sensory afferents. The same shearing force can result from tilting of the head (left), which exposes the hair cells to a portion of the acceleration (a) owing to gravity (Fg), or from horizontal linear acceleration of the body (right).

The Postural Control System Uses a Body Schema

That Incorporates Internal Models for Balance

## Because of the mechanical complexity of the body, with its many skeletal segments and muscles, the nervous system requires a detailed representation of the

body and its interaction with the environment. To execute the simple movement of raising your hand and touching your nose with your index finger while your eyes are closed, your nervous system must know the characteristics (length, mass, and connections) of each segment of the arm, the shoulder, and head as well as the orientation of your arm with respect to the gravity vector and your nose. Thus, information from multiple sensory systems is integrated into a central representation of the body, often called the body schema.

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 898

The body schema for postural control, as developed

by Viktor Gurfinkel, is not simply a sensory map like

the somatotopic representation of the skin in primary

sensory cortex. Instead, it incorporates internal models of the body's relationship with the environment. The body schema is used to compute appropriate anticipatory and automatic postural reactions to maintain balance and postural orientation. A simplified example of such an internal model is one in which the body is represented as a single segment hinged at the foot (Figure 36–12A). The internal model generates an estimate of the orientation of the foot in space, which also serves as an estimate of the orientation of the support surface, a variable that cannot be directly sensed. Henry Head, a neurologist working in the early part of the 20th century, described the body schema as a dynamic system in which both spatial and tem-

poral features are continually updated, a concept that remains current. To allow adequate planning of movement strategies, the body schema must incorporate not only the relationship of body segments to space and to each other but also the mass and inertia of each segment and an estimate of the external forces acting on the body including gravity. The body schema integrates sensory information from the somatosensory, vestibular, and visual systems to orient the body to vertical. Even in the dark, peo-

ple can accurately reorient a projected line to a vertical position (visual vertical) and they can reorient themselves to vertical when sitting on a tilting swing (gravitational vertical). Visual vertical and gravitational vertical are independent of each other. Patients with asymmetrical vestibular function show abnormal visual vertical but normal gravitational vertical, whereas patients with hemi-neglect from stroke show abnormal gravitational vertical but normal visual vertical. Another component of the body schema is a model of the sensory information expected as a result of a movement. Disorientation or motion sickness may

result when the actual sensory information received by the nervous system does not match the expected sensory information, as in the microgravity environment of space flight. With continued exposure to the new environment, however, the model is gradually updated until expected and actual sensory information agree and the person is no longer spatially disoriented. The internal model for balance control must be continually updated, both in the short term, as we use experience to improve our balance strategies, and

in the long term, as we age and our bodies change in shape and size. One way the body schema is updated is by changing the relative sensitivity or weighting of each sensory system.

19/01/21 4:08 PM

FS

BS

BF

<!-- image -->

Body sway angle Internal model Chapter 36 / Posture Estimate of physical reality

<!-- image -->

(foot in space)

<!-- image -->


Vestibular 1.5

loss subject Control

<!-- image -->

1.0

<!-- image -->

Platform

tilt angle

Figure 36–12 Many types of sensory signals are integrated

and weighted in an internal model that optimizes balance

and orientation. (Adapted from Peterka 2002.)

A. The simple example of a person standing on a tilted surface illustrates how the nervous system might estimate physical variables that are not sensed directly. The physical

variables are body tilt with respect to earth vertical or bodyin-space (BS), and body angle relative to the foot (BF). The angle of the foot in space (FS) is simply the difference BS − BF. The neural estimate of body in space (bs) comes from vestibular and other receptors that detect tilt of the body relative to gravity. The neural estimate of body angle to foot (bf) comes from somatosensory signals related to ankle joint angle. The internal model for estimating physical reality, bs − bf, produces a neural estimate of the foot in space (fs). Such estimates of the physical world are continually updated based on experience. B. Sensory information is weighted dynamically to maintain balance and orientation under varying conditions. The figure illustrates findings from an experiment in which human

subjects stood blindfolded on a platform that slowly rotated continuously in the toes-up or toes-down direction at amplitudes of up to 8° (peak to peak). 1. Comparison of body sway

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 899


during surface oscillations in a subject with loss of vestibular

function and a group of control subjects. Body-sway angle is

measured relative to gravitational vertical during platform tilt

and expressed as root mean square (RMS) sway in degrees. The dashed line represents equal platform and body sway; for example, for a platform tilt of 4°, an equal amount of body sway is 1° RMS. In control subjects, the body and platform sway are equal for small platform tilts up to 2°, suggesting that people normally use somatosensory signals to remain perpendicular to the platform (minimizing changes in ankle angle). With larger platform tilts, body sway does not increase much beyond 0.5° RMS. In contrast, subjects with vestibular loss sway even more than the platform (1.5° RMS of body tilt at 4° of platform tilt) and cannot remain standing at platform tilts above 4°. Thus, when both vestibular and visual signals are absent, a person attempts to maintain his position only relative to the support surface and has difficulty maintaining balance as that surface moves. 2. In control subjects, as platform tilt increases, the influence of somatosensory input decreases with increasing platform tilt while the influence of vestibular input increases. At larger tilt angles, the greater influence of vestibular input minimizes the degree of body sway away from gravitational vertical.

19/01/21 4:08 PM

fs

Vestibular

Somatosensory

A Internal model for estimating physical reality

Sensory Physical

reality signals



Part V / Movement

Control of Posture Is Task Dependent

The senses and muscles used to control posture vary,

## depending on task constraints and requirements. For

example, when vestibular and somatosensory infor-

mation is altered while working on a space station, vision is used to orient the body to tasks, and the goal of postural equilibrium changes from preventing falls due to gravity to preventing unintended collision with objects due to inertia. A healthy nervous system very quickly adapts to changing tasks, goals, and environments by modifying its relative dependence upon different sensory information and by using different sets of muscles to optimize achieving the goals of both posture control and voluntary movements. Task Requirements Determine the Role of Each Sensory System in Postural Equilibrium

and Orientation

## The postural control system must be able to change the weighting of different sensory modalities to accommo-

date changes in the environment and movement goals.

Subjects standing on a firm stable surface tend to rely primarily on somatosensory information for postural orientation. When the support surface is unstable, subjects depend more on vestibular and visual information. However, even when the support surface is not stable, light touch with a fingertip on a stable object is more effective than vision in maintaining postural orientation and balance. Vestibular information is particularly critical when visual and somatosensory information is ambiguous or absent, such as when skiing downhill or walking below deck on a ship. The changeable weighting of individual sensory modalities was demonstrated in an experiment in which subjects were blindfolded and asked to stand

quietly on a surface with a tilt that slowly oscillated by varying amounts, up to 8° in magnitude. For tilts of less than 2°, all subjects sway with the platform, suggesting that they use somatosensory information to orient their body to the support surface (Figure 36–12B). At larger tilts, healthy subjects attenuate their sway and orient their posture more with respect to gravitational vertical than to the surface, as they rely more on vestibular information so they stop increasing body sway. Thus, relative sensory weighting changes in control subjects such that somatosensory weight is highest with a stable platform and vestibular weight is highest when standing on an unstable surface, such as with large surface tilts (Figure 36–12B2). In contrast, patients who have lost vestibular function persist in swaying along with the platform and subsequently fall

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 900

during large surface tilts. This behavior is consistent

with the patients' inappropriate automatic postural

response to platform tilts.

Studies such as these suggest that when people are standing on moving or unstable surfaces, the weighting of vestibular and visual information increases,

whereas that of somatosensory information decreases. Any sensory modality may dominate at a particular time, depending on the conditions of postural support and the specific motor behavior to be performed. Control of Posture Is Distributed in the

Nervous System

## Postural orientation and balance are achieved through the dynamic and context-dependent interplay among

all levels of the central nervous system, from the spinal

cord to cerebral cortex. The major areas of the brain involved in postural control are shown in Figure 36–13. Signals from specific areas in all lobes of the cerebral cortex converge and are integrated to determine appropriate outputs from motor cortical areas to subcortical structures. The basal ganglia, cerebellum, and pedunculopontine nucleus then send outputs to the brain stem. Ultimately, inputs from these varied sources result in activation of the reticulospinal and vestibulospinal pathways, which descend to the spinal cord where they contact interneurons and spinal motor neurons for postural control. Afferent inputs from visual, vestibular, and somatosensory sources are integrated along the neuraxis, including the vestibular nuclei and right parietal

cortex, to inform the internal model of body orientation and balance. This internal model is continually updated by the cerebellum based on error signals between expected and actual sensory feedback following motor commands. Spinal Cord Circuits Are Sufficient for Maintaining Antigravity Support but Not Balance

## Adult cats with complete spinal transection at the thoracic level can, with experience, support the weight of their hindquarters with fairly normal hind limb and

trunk postural orientation, but they have little control of balance. These animals do not exhibit normal postural responses in their hind limbs when the support surface moves. Their response to horizontal motion consists of small, random, and highly variable bursts of activity in extensor muscles, and postural activity in flexor muscles is completely absent. Active balance is absent despite the fact that extensors and flexors can

19/01/21 4:08 PM

Figure 36–13 Many parts of the

nervous system control pos-

ture. Areas of frontal, parietal,

temporal, and occipital cortex, as

well as the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and pendunculopontine nucleus (PPN), provide inputs to the recticulospinal and vestibulospinal pathways descending to spinal motor neurons. Afferent inputs from the visual, vestibular, and somatosensory systems are integrated in the brainstem and cortex to update the body schema and inform future postural commands. (Abbreviations: M1 , primary motor cortex; S1, primary somatosensory cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.) (Adapted from Beristain 2016.)

be recruited for other movements such as stepping on

Anticipatory postural

adjustments

<!-- image -->

a treadmill, suggesting that unlike locomotion, postural

muscle activation requires supraspinal control.

An adult cat with a spinal transection can stand independently for only short periods of time and within a narrow range of stability; head turns in par-

ticular cause the animal to lose balance. What stability there is likely results from the broad base of support afforded by quadrupedal stance, the stiffness of the tonically contracting hind limb extensors that support the weight of the hindquarters, and active compensation by forelimbs that continue to produce postural responses. Humans with spinal cord injuries have various amounts of antigravity muscle tonus but lack automatic postural responses below the level of the lesion. These results emphasize that antigravity support and balance control are distinct mechanisms and that the control of balance requires the involvement of supraspinal circuits. The Brain Stem and Cerebellum Integrate Sensory Signals for Posture

## If spinal circuits alone are not capable of producing automatic postural responses, what supraspinal centers are responsible for these responses? Although the

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 901

Chapter 36 / Posture

Body schema Visual Vestibular

answer to this question remains unknown, good can-

didates include the brain stem and cerebellum, which

are highly interconnected and work together to modu-

late the descending commands to spinal motor centers of the limbs and trunk. These regions have the input– output structure that would be expected of centers for postural control. Muscle synergies for automatic postural responses may be organized in the brain stem, perhaps the reticular formation. However, adaptation of postural syner-

gies to changes in the environment and task demands may require the cerebellum. Two regions of the cerebellum influence orientation and balance: the vestibulocerebellum (nodulus, uvula, and fastigial nucleus) and the spinocerebel-

lum (anterior lobe and interpositus nucleus). These regions are interconnected with the vestibular nuclei and reticular formation of the pons and medulla (see Figure 37–4). Lesions of the brain stem and vestibulocerebellum produce a variety of deficits in head and trunk control including a tendency to tilt from vertical, even with eyes open, suggesting a deficit in the internal representation of postural orientation. Lesions of the spinocerebellum result in excessive postural sway that is worse with the eyes closed, ataxia during walking, and hypermetric postural responses, suggesting

19/01/21 4:08 PM

M1

S1
Figure 36–13 Many parts of the

nervous system control pos-

ture. Areas of frontal, parietal,

temporal, and occipital cortex, as

well as the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and pendunculopontine nucleus (PPN), provide inputs to the recticulospinal and vestibulospinal pathways descending to spinal motor neurons. Afferent inputs from the visual, vestibular, and somatosensory systems are integrated in the brainstem and cortex to update the body schema and inform future postural commands. (Abbreviations: M1 , primary motor cortex; S1, primary somatosensory cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.) (Adapted from Beristain 2016.)

be recruited for other movements such as stepping on

Anticipatory postural

adjustments

<!-- image -->

a treadmill, suggesting that unlike locomotion, postural

muscle activation requires supraspinal control.

An adult cat with a spinal transection can stand independently for only short periods of time and within a narrow range of stability; head turns in par-

ticular cause the animal to lose balance. What stability there is likely results from the broad base of support afforded by quadrupedal stance, the stiffness of the tonically contracting hind limb extensors that support the weight of the hindquarters, and active compensation by forelimbs that continue to produce postural responses. Humans with spinal cord injuries have various amounts of antigravity muscle tonus but lack automatic postural responses below the level of the lesion. These results emphasize that antigravity support and balance control are distinct mechanisms and that the control of balance requires the involvement of supraspinal circuits. The Brain Stem and Cerebellum Integrate Sensory Signals for Posture

## If spinal circuits alone are not capable of producing automatic postural responses, what supraspinal centers are responsible for these responses? Although the

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 901

Chapter 36 / Posture

Body schema Visual Vestibular

answer to this question remains unknown, good can-

didates include the brain stem and cerebellum, which

are highly interconnected and work together to modu-

late the descending commands to spinal motor centers of the limbs and trunk. These regions have the input– output structure that would be expected of centers for postural control. Muscle synergies for automatic postural responses may be organized in the brain stem, perhaps the reticular formation. However, adaptation of postural syner-

gies to changes in the environment and task demands may require the cerebellum. Two regions of the cerebellum influence orientation and balance: the vestibulocerebellum (nodulus, uvula, and fastigial nucleus) and the spinocerebel-

lum (anterior lobe and interpositus nucleus). These regions are interconnected with the vestibular nuclei and reticular formation of the pons and medulla (see Figure 37–4). Lesions of the brain stem and vestibulocerebellum produce a variety of deficits in head and trunk control including a tendency to tilt from vertical, even with eyes open, suggesting a deficit in the internal representation of postural orientation. Lesions of the spinocerebellum result in excessive postural sway that is worse with the eyes closed, ataxia during walking, and hypermetric postural responses, suggesting

19/01/21 4:08 PM

M1

S1



Part V / Movement

deficits in balance corrections. Certain regions in the

pons and medulla facilitate or depress extensor tonus

and could be involved in antigravity support.

The brain stem and cerebellum are sites of integration of sensory inputs, perhaps generating the internal model of body orientation and balance. Vestibular

and visual inputs are distributed to brain stem centers (Chapters 25 and 27) and the vestibulocerebellum. The spinocerebellum receives signals from rapidly conducting proprioceptive and cutaneous fibers. More slowly conducting somatosensory fibers project to the vestibular nuclei and reticular formation. Two major descending systems carry signals from the brain stem and cerebellum to the spinal cord and could trigger automatic postural responses for balance

and orientation. The medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts originate from the vestibular nuclei, and the medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts originate from the reticular formation of the pons and medulla (see Figure 37–5). Lesions of these tracts result in profound ataxia and postural instability. In contrast, lesions of the corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts have minimal effect on balance even though they produce profound disturbance of voluntary limb movements. The Spinocerebellum and Basal Ganglia Are Important in Adaptation of Posture

## Patients with spinocerebellar disorders such as alcoholic anterior-lobe syndrome and basal ganglia deficits

such as Parkinson disease experience postural diffi-

culties. Studies suggest that the spinocerebellum and basal ganglia play complementary roles in adapting postural responses to changing conditions. The spinocerebellum is where the amplitude of postural responses is adapted based on experience. The basal ganglia are important for quickly adjusting the

postural set when conditions suddenly change. Both the spinocerebellum and the basal ganglia regulate muscle tone and force for voluntary postural adjustments. They are not necessary, however, for triggering or constructing the basic postural patterns. Patients with disorders of the spinocerebellum have difficulty modifying the magnitude of balance adjustments with practice, over the course of repeated

trials, but can readily adapt postural responses immediately after a change in conditions based on sensory feedback. For example, a patient standing on a movable platform scales the size of postural responses appropriately when platform velocity is increased with each trial. These postural adjustments rely on velocity information, which is encoded by somatosensory inputs at the beginning of platform movement.

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 902

In contrast, patients with cerebellar disorders

cannot scale the size of postural responses based on

feedforward control using the anticipated amplitude

of postural displacements. Because the amplitude of platform movement is not known until the platform has stopped moving, well after the initial postural response is complete, a subject cannot use feedback from the trial at hand to guide the response but must instead use his experience from previous trials to inform his response in a subsequent trial of the same amplitude. Whereas a healthy subject does this quite readily, a patient with spinocerebellar disorders is unable to efficiently adapt his postural responses based on recent experience (Figure 36–14A). A healthy subject standing on a moveable platform is able to scale muscle activity during sudden backward motion of the platform to counteract the

forward sway induced by the perturbation. A subject with spinocerebellar disease always overresponds, although the timing of muscle activation is normal (Figure 36–14B). As a result, this individual returns beyond the upright position and oscillates back and forth. Reminiscent of the hypermetria observed immediately after labyrinthectomy, cerebellar hypermetria may also result from loss of Purkinje cell inhibition on spinal motor centers. A patient with Parkinson disease can, with sufficient practice, gradually modify his postural responses but has difficulty changing responses when conditions

change suddenly. Such postural inflexibility is seen when initial posture changes. For example, when a normal subject switches from standing upright to sitting on a stool on a movable platform, the pattern of his automatic postural response to backward movement of the platform changes immediately. Because leg muscle activity is no longer necessary after the switch from standing to sitting, this component ceases to be recruited. In contrast, a patient with Parkinson disease employs the same muscle activation pattern for both sitting and standing (Figure 36–15). l-DOPA replace-

ment therapy does not improve the patient's ability to switch postural set. With repetition of trials in the seated posture, however, the leg muscle activity eventually disappears, showing that enough experience permits adaptation of postural responses. A patient with Parkinson disease also has difficulty when instructed to increase or decrease the magnitude of a postural response, a difficulty that is consistent with the inability to change cognitive sets quickly. Patients with Parkinson disease have problems with postural tone and force generation in addition to

19/01/21 4:08 PM

A Scaling of postural responses

1 Task requiring sensory input only


## Cerebellar

damage


<!-- image -->

Control

20 25 30 35

Translation velocity (cm/s)

B Postural responses to sudden disturbance

Control

400 600


<!-- image -->

Cerebellar damage

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 36–14 The spinocerebellum has a role in adapt- Chapter 36 / Posture Spinocerebellum Predictable amplitude Random amplitude TIB

<!-- image -->

adjustments in the spinocerebellar subject are compromised.

ing postural responses to changing conditions and in

scaling postural responses to anticipated postural distur-

bances. The spinocerebellum is important for adapting postural responses based on experience. Patients with a spinocerebellar disorder are able to use immediate sensory input, but not experience, to adjust automatic postural responses. (Adapted, with permission, from Horak and Diener 1994.) A. 1. In this experiment, subjects stand on a platform that is moved horizontally; the velocity is increased on each trial. Maintaining balance requires scaling responses to the velocity of

the platform using sensory feedback. The adjustments in a subject with a spinocerebellar disorder have the same regression coefficient (slope) as those of a control subject, even though in each trial the responses are larger and more variable than those of the control subject. 2. When subjects are required to anticipate and adapt to platform translation, the postural

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 903

When translation amplitude is random, responses are large, as

if the subject expects a large translation. When trials with the

same amplitude are repeated, a control subject learns to predict the amplitude of the disturbance and adjust his response. In contrast, a spinocerebellar subject shows no improvement in performance; he cannot use his experience in one trial to adjust his responses in subsequent trials. All responses are large, as if the subject always expects the large translation. B. In this experiment, subjects stand on a platform that is moved backward (6 cm amplitude at 10 cm/s). In a control subject, the onset of movement evokes a small burst of activ-

ity in the gastrocnemius (GAS), an ankle extensor. In a subject with damage to the anterior lobe of the cerebellum, the muscle responses are overly large, with bursts of activity alternating between the gastrocnemius and its antagonist, the tibialis anterior (TIB).

19/01/21 4:08 PM

2 Task requiring adaptation


Cerebellar

Change in torque (nm/s)

damage



Part V / Movement

<!-- image -->

Figure 36–15 The basal ganglia are important for adapting

postural responses to a sudden change in initial conditions.

(Adapted, with permission, from Horak, Nutt, and Nashner

1992.) A. When a normal subject switches from upright stance to sitting, he immediately modifies his response to backward movement of the support platform. The postural response to

movement while seated does not involve the leg muscles— the gastrocnemius (GAS) and hamstrings (HAM)—but does

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 904

activate the paraspinal muscles (PSP) and with shorter latency

than in the response to movement while standing. (Abbre-

viations: ABD, abdominals; QUAD, quadriceps; TIB, tibialis

anterior.) B. A patient with Parkinson disease does not suppress the leg muscle response in the first trial after switching from standing to sitting. The postural response of this subject is similar for

both initial positions: Antagonist muscles (purple) are activated along with agonists (pink).

19/01/21 4:08 PM

an inability to adapt to changing conditions. The dis-

ease's bradykinesia (slowness of movement) is reflected

in slow development of force in postural responses,

and its rigidity is manifested in co-contraction. l-DOPA replacement greatly improves a patient's ability to generate not only forceful voluntary movements but also the accompanying postural adjustments, such as rising onto the toes and gait. However, neither the automatic postural response to an unexpected disturbance nor postural adaptation is improved by l-DOPA, suggesting that these functions involve the nondopaminergic pathways affected by Parkinson disease. Cerebral Cortex Centers Contribute to Postural Control

## Several areas of cerebral cortex influence postural orientation and equilibrium, including both anticipatory

and automatic postural responses. Most voluntary

movements, which are initiated in the cerebral cortex, require postural adjustments that must be integrated with the primary goal of the movement in both timing and amplitude. Where this integration occurs is not clear. The cerebral cortex is more involved in anticipatory postural adjustments than in automatic postural reactions. However, recent electroencephalographic

studies show that areas of cerebral cortex are activated by anticipation of a postural disturbance before an automatic postural response is initiated. This finding is consistent with the idea that the cortex optimizes balance control as part of motor planning. The supplementary motor area and temporoparietal cortex have both been implicated in postural control. The supplementary motor area, anterior to

the motor cortex, is likely involved with anticipatory postural adjustments that accompany voluntary movements. The temporoparietal cortex appears to integrate sensory information and may comprise internal models for perception of body verticality. Lesions of insular cortex can impair perception of the visual vertical, whereas lesions of superior parietal cortex impair perception of the postural vertical, and either of these defects may impair balance when standing on an unstable support. Sensorimotor cortex receives somatosensory inputs signaling balance disturbances and postural responses. However, this region is not essential for

automatic postural adjustments. Lesioning the motor cortex in cats impairs lifting of the forelimb in response to a light touch during stance but does not abolish the accompanying postural adjustment in the contralateral forelimb. Although the sensorimotor cortex is not

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 905

Chapter 36 / Posture


responsible for postural adjustments, it may have a

role in the process.

Behavioral studies, too, have implicated cortical

processes in postural control. Control of posture, like control of voluntary movement, requires attention.

When subjects must press a button following a visual or auditory cue while also maintaining balance, their reaction time increases with the difficulty of the task (balancing on one foot versus sitting, for example). Moreover, when subjects try to perform a cognitive task while actively maintaining posture, the performance of either or both can degrade. For example, when a subject is asked to count backward by threes while standing on one foot, both the cognitive task and postural adjustment deteriorate. The timing of automatic postural responses to unexpected disturbances is little affected by cognitive interference. Balance control is also influenced by emotional state, thus implicating the limbic system in posture control. Fear of falling, for example, can increase postural

tone and stiffness, reduce sway area, increase sway velocity, and alter balancing strategies in response to disturbances. Finally, balance control is also influenced by attentional ability and demands, thus implicating the frontoparietal attention network. There is evidence of

competition for central processing resources in dual task conditions, where a person must maintain balance and perform a concurrent cognitive task. Both postural control and cognitive performance may be impaired in dual-task conditions as compared to single-task conditions assessing either postural or cognitive performance in isolation. As cognitive demands increase, responses to postural perturbations are smaller in amplitude and occur at longer latency. However, when necessary, healthy individuals prioritize postural control over the cognitive task and demonstrate decreasing cognitive performance as postural demands increase. In contrast, individuals with nervous system disorders such as Parkinson disease may not prioritize postural control in dual-task situations and may be at increased risk for falls in dual-task situations. Although the roles of specific areas of cerebral cortex in postural control are largely undefined, there is no doubt that the cortex is important for learning

new, complex postural strategies. The cortex must be involved in the amazing improvement in balance and postural orientation of athletes and dancers who use cognitive information and advice from coaches. In fact, the cerebral cortex is involved in postural control each time we consciously maintain our balance while walking across a slippery floor, standing on a moving bus, or waiting tables on a rocking ship.

19/01/21 4:08 PM


Part V / Movement

Highlights

1. The two goals of posture are balance and orienta-

tion. Balance control maintains the body in stable

equilibrium to avoid falls. Postural orientation

- aligns the body segments with respect to each other and to the world, such as maintaining the head vertical. 2. A sudden displacement of the body center of mass while standing triggers ankle, hip, and/or stepping strategies to return the center of mass within
- the base of foot support. 3. Postural responses are fast and automatic, but adapt quickly to changes in environmental context, intention, and conditions. Postural responses
- can also be improved with practice. 4. Activation of centrally organized muscle synergies is used to control balance. This synergy organization simplifies the neural control so only a few
- central commands are required, instead of a separate command for each muscle, while allowing flexibility and adaptability for postural control. 5. Somatosensory, vestibular, and visual sensory modalities are integrated to form an internal representation of the body that the nervous system
- uses for postural orientation and balance control. Somatosensory signals trigger the fastest, largest postural responses and are most critical for control of postural sway in standing. Vestibular signals are particularly critical when standing on an unstable surface, when it is difficult to use somatosensory information for postural orientation. Visual inputs provide spatial orientation and motion information. 6. The body center of mass is often outside of the base of foot support during walking and running so balance is provided by adjusting foot placement
- and lateral trunk stability to control the center of mass with respect to the changing base of support. 7. The vestibulocerebellum and the spinocerebellum are interconnected with the vestibular nuclei and reticular formation of the brainstem for control of
- balance and postural orientation. 8. The basal ganglia are important for control of axial postural tone, adapting postural response strategies based on initial conditions, and anticipatory
- postural control. The cerebellum is important for adapting the magnitude of balance responses with practice, over the course of repeated trials, and for scaling the size of postural responses. 9. Posture control involves many brain areas from the brainstem to the frontal cortex, but the specific circuits involved in different types of posture

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 906

control (automatic postural responses, anticipa-

tory postural adjustments, body sway in stance,

sensory integration for a body schema and verti-

cality) have yet to be determined.

Fay B. Horak

Gammon M. Earhart

Suggested Reading

Chiba R, Takakusaki K, Ota J, Yozu A, Haga N. 2016. Human

upright posture control models based on multisen-

sory inputs; in fast and slow dynamics. Neurosci Res

- 104:96–104. Cullen KE. 2016. Physiology of central pathways. In: JM Furman, T Lempert (eds). Handbook of Clinical Neurology, vol 137, pp 17–40. New York: Elsevier.
- Dietz V. 1992. Human neuronal control of automatic func -tional movements—interaction between central programs and afferent input. Physiol Rev 72:33–69.
- Horak FB. 2006. Postural orientation and equilibrium: what do we need to know about neural control of balance to prevent falls? Age Ageing 35(Suppl 2):ii7–ii11.
- Horak FB, Macpherson JM. 1996. Postural orientation and equilibrium. In: LB Rowell, JT Shepherd (eds). Handbook of Physiology, Section 12, Exercise: Regulation and Integration
- of Multiple Systems, pp. 255–292. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Macpherson JM, Deliagina TG, Orlovsky GN. 1997. Control of body orientation and equilibrium in vertebrates. In: PSG Stein, S Grillner, AI Selverston, DG Stuart (eds).
- Neurons Networks and Motor Behavior, pp. 257–267. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Massion J. 1994. Postural control system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 4:877–887. Woollacott M, Shumway-Cook A. 2002. Attention and the
- control of posture and gait: a review of an emerging area of research. Gait Posture 16:1–14.
- References

Beristain X. 2016. Gait. In: Salardini A, Biller J (eds). The

Hospital Neurology Book. Beijing, China: McGraw-Hill

Education.

- Brandt T, Paulus W, Straube A. 1986. Vision and posture. In: W Bles, T Brandt (eds). Disorders of Posture and Gait , pp. 157–175. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
- Cavallari P, Bolzoni F, Burttinit C, Esposti R. 2016. The organization and control of intra-limb anticipatory postural adjustments and their role in movement performance.
- Front Hum Neurosci 10:525.

19/01/21 4:08 PM

Cordo PJ, Nashner LM. 1982. Properties of postural adjustments

associated with rapid arm movements. J Neurophysiol

47:287–302.

- Darriot J, Mohsen J, Cullen K. 2015. Rapid adaptation of multisensory integration in vestibular pathways. Front Syst Neurosci 16:1–5.
- De Havas J, Gomi H, Haggard P. 2017. Experimental investigations of control principles of involuntary movement: a comprehensive review of the Kohnstamm phenomenon.
- Exp Brain Res 235:1953–1997. Dunbar DC, Horak FB, Macpherson JM, Rushmer DS. 1986. Neural control of quadrupedal and bipedal stance: implications for the evolution of erect posture. Am J Phys
- Anthropol 69:93–105. Gera G, Fling BW, Van Ooteghem K, Cameron M, Frank JS, Horak FB. 2016. Postural motor learning deficits in people with MS in spatial but not temporal control of center of
- mass. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 30:722–730. Gurfinkel VS, Levick YS. 1991. Perceptual and automatic aspects of the postural body scheme. In: J Paillard (ed). Brain and Space, pp. 147–162. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Hof AL, Curtze C. 2016. A stricter condition for standing balance after unexpected perturbations. J Biomech 49:580–585.
- Horak FB, Diener HC. 1994. Cerebellar control of postural scaling and central set in stance. J Neurophysiol 72:479–493. Horak FB, Nashner LM. 1986. Central programming of pos-
- tural movements: adaptation to altered support-surface configurations. J Neurophysiol 55:1369–1381.
- Horak FB, Nutt J, Nashner LM. 1992. Postural inflexibility in parkinsonian subjects. J Neurol Sci 111:46–58. Inglis JT, Horak FB, Shupert CL, Jones-Rycewicz C. 1994. The
- importance of somatosensory information in triggering and scaling automatic postural responses in humans. Exp
- Brain Res 101:159–164. Jacobs JV, Horak FB. 2007. Cortical control of postural responses. J Neural Transm 114:1339–1348. Jahn K, Deutschländer A, Stephan T, Strupp M, Wiesmann
- M, Brandt T. 2004. Brain activation patterns during imagined stance and locomotion in functional magnetic reso-
- nance imaging. Neuroimage 22:1722–1731. Lee WA, Michaels CF, Pai YC. 1990. The organization of torque and EMG activity during bilateral handle pulls by standing humans. Exp Brain Res 82:304–314.

Kandel-Ch36\_0883-0907.indd 907

Chapter 36 / Posture


MacKinnon CD, Winter DA. 1993. Control of whole body

balance in the frontal plane during human walking.

J Biomech 26:633–644.

- Macpherson JM. 1988. Strategies that simplify the control of quadrupedal stance. 2. Electromyographic activity. J Neurophysiol 60:218–231.
- Macpherson JM, Everaert DG, Stapley PJ, Ting LH. 2007. Bilateral vestibular loss in cats leads to active destabilization of balance during pitch and roll rotations of the support
- surface. J Neurophysiol 97:4357–4367. Macpherson JM, Fung J. 1999. Weight support and balance during perturbed stance in the chronic spinal cat. J Neurophysiol 82:3066–3081.
- Maki BE, McIlroy WE. 1997. The role of limb movements in maintaining upright stance: the "change-in-support" strategy. Phys Ther 77:488–507.
- Maurer C, Mergner T, Peterka RJ. 2006. Multisensory control of human upright stance. Exp Brain Res 171:231–250. McMahon TA, Bonner JT. 1983. On Size and Life. New York:
- W.H. Freeman. Mittelstaedt H. 1998. Origin and processing of postural infor-
- mation. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 22:473–478. Otten W. 1999. Balancing on a narrow ridge: biomechanics
- and control. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 354:869–875. Peterka RJ. 2002. Sensorimotor integration in human pos-
- tural control. J Neurophysiol 88:1097–1118. Peterson DS, Horak FB. 2016. Neural control of walking in
- people with Parkinsonism. Physiology 3:95–107. Rousseaux M, Honore J, Saj A. 2014. Body representations
- and brain damage. Neurophysiol Clin 44:59–67. Stapley PJ, Ting LH, Kuifu C, Everaert DG, Macpherson JM.
2006. Bilateral vestibular loss leads to active destabiliza -tion of balance during voluntary head turns in the stand-
- ing cat. J Neurophysiol 95:3783–3797. Takakusaki K. 2017. Functional neuroanatomy for posture and gait control. J Mov Disord 10:1–17. Ting LH, Chiel HJ, Trumbower RD, et al. 2015. Neurome-
- chanical principles underlying movement modularity and their implications for rehabilitation. Neuron 86:38–54.

19/01/21 4:08 PM


The Cerebellum

Damage of the Cerebellum Causes Distinctive Symptoms

and Signs

Damage Results in Characteristic Abnormalities of

## Movement and Posture Damage Affects Specific Sensory and Cognitive Abilities

The Cerebellum Indirectly Controls Movement Through Other Brain Structures

The Cerebellum Is a Large Subcortical Brain Structure

## The Cerebellum Connects With the Cerebral Cortex Through Recurrent Loops

Different Movements Are Controlled by Functional

Longitudinal Zones The Cerebellar Cortex Comprises Repeating Functional

Units Having the Same Basic Microcircuit The Cerebellar Cortex Is Organized Into Three

## Functionally Specialized Layers The Climbing-Fiber and Mossy-Fiber Afferent Systems

Encode and Process Information Differently The Cerebellar Microcircuit Architecture Suggests a

Canonical Computation The Cerebellum Is Hypothesized to Perform Several

General Computational Functions The Cerebellum Contributes to Feedforward

## Sensorimotor Control The Cerebellum incorporates an Internal Model of the

Motor Apparatus The Cerebellum Integrates Sensory Inputs and

Corollary Discharge The Cerebellum Contributes to Timing Control

The Cerebellum Participates in Motor Skill Learning

Climbing-Fiber Activity Changes the Synaptic Efficacy of Parallel Fibers

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 908

The Cerebellum Is Necessary for Motor Learning in

Several Different Movement Systems

Learning Occurs at Several Sites in the Cerebellum

Highlights

T

he cerebellum constitutes only 10% of the

total volume of the brain but contains more than

one-half of its neurons. The cerebellar cortex

comprises a series of highly regular, repeating units, each of which contains the same basic microcircuit. Different regions of the cerebellum receive projections from distinct brain and spinal structures and then project back to the brain. The similarity of the architecture and physiology in all regions of the cerebellum implies that different regions of the cerebellum perform similar computational operations on different inputs. The symptoms of cerebellar damage in humans and experimental animals provide compelling evidence that the cerebellum participates in the control of

movement. The symptoms, in addition to being diagnostic for clinicians, thus help define the possible roles of the cerebellum in controlling behavior. Several fundamental principles define our understanding of the physiological function of the cerebellum. First, the cerebellum acts in advance of sensory

feedback arising from movement, thus providing feedforward control of muscular contractions. Second, to achieve such control, the cerebellum relies on internal models of the body to process and compare sensory inputs with copies of motor commands. Third, the cerebellum plays a special role in motor and perceptual timing. Fourth, the cerebellum is critical for adapting

11/12/20 12:18 PM

and learning motor skills. Finally, the primate cerebel-

lum has extensive connectivity to nonmotor areas of

the cerebral cortex, suggesting it performs similar

functions in the performance and learning of motor and nonmotor behaviors. Damage of the Cerebellum Causes Distinctive

Symptoms and Signs

## Damage Results in Characteristic Abnormalities of Movement and Posture

## Disorders that involve the cerebellum typically disrupt normal movement patterns, demonstrating the cer-

ebellum's critical role in movement. Patients describe

a loss of the automatic, unconscious nature of most movements. In the early 20th century, Gordon Holmes recorded the self-report of a man with a lesion of his right cerebellar hemisphere: "movements of my left arm are done subconsciously, but I have to think out each movement of the right arm. I come to a dead stop in turning and have to think before I start again." This has been interpreted as an interruption in the automatic level of processing by cerebellar inputs and outputs. With a malfunctioning cerebellum, it seems that

the cerebral cortex needs to play a more active role in programming the details of motor actions. Importantly, individuals with cerebellar damage do not experience the paralysis that can be associated with cerebral cortical damage. Instead, they show characteristic abnormalities in voluntary movement, walking, and posture that have provided important clues about cerebellar function. The most prominent symptom of cerebellar disorders is ataxia, or lack of coordination of movement. Ataxia is a generic term used to describe the collec-

tive motor features associated with cerebellar damage. People with cerebellar disorders make movements that qualitatively appear jerky, irregular, and highly variable. Limb ataxia during reaching is characterized by curved hand paths that are dysmetric in that they over- or undershoot the intended target and oscillate (Figure 37–1A). Patients often break a movement down into components, presumably in an effort to simplify control of multi-joint movements (decomposition of movement). Yet this may not be effective. For example, patients often have difficulty holding the shoulder steady while moving the elbow, a deficit thought to be due to poor predictions of how the movement at the elbow mechanically affects the shoulder (Figure 37–1B). If prediction fails, then patients are forced to try to steady the shoulder using time-delayed feedback, which is less effective.

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 909

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


At the end of reaching movements, there can be

marked oscillation as the hand approaches the target.

This action (or intention) tremor is the result of a series

of erroneous, overshooting attempts to correct the movement. It largely disappears when the eyes are shut, suggesting that it is driven by time-delayed visual feedback of the movement. Finally, patients show abnormalities in the rate and regularity of repeated movements, a sign referred to as dysdiadochokinesia (Greek, impaired alternating movement) that can be readily demonstrated when a patient attempts to perform rapid alternating movements (Figure 37–1C). People with cerebellar damage also exhibit gait ataxia and poor balance. When walking, they take steps that are irregularly timed and placed. They have difficulty shift-

ing their weight from one foot to the other, which can lead to falling. The trunk oscillates when they are unsupported in sitting, standing, and during walking, particularly as they start, stop, or turn. A wide stepping pattern with feet spread apart is common and is thought to be a compensatory measure to improve stability. Other signs that are commonly observed with cerebellar dysfunction can also occur with damage to other brain regions. People with cerebellar damage

often have slurred speech with irregular timing (dysarthria); repetitive to-and-fro movements of the eyes with a slow and fast phase (nystagmus); and reduced resistance to passive limb displacements (hypotonia), which is thought to be related to so-called "pendular reflexes" often observed in cerebellar patients. In patients with cerebellar disease, the leg may oscillate like a pendulum many times after a knee jerk produced by a tap on the patellar tendon with a reflex hammer, instead of coming to rest immediately. Damage Affects Specific Sensory and Cognitive Abilities

## It is now known that cerebellar damage affects proprioceptive abilities (the sense of limb position and

movement), but only during active movement. Pro-

prioceptive acuity—the sense of the position and movement of the limbs—is normally more precise for active movements than for passive movements. Cerebellar patients show normal proprioceptive acuity when they have to judge which of two passive movements is larger. However, their proprioceptive acuity is worse than that of healthy individuals when they move a limb actively. One interpretation of these findings is that the cerebellum normally helps to predict how active movements will unfold, which would be important for movement coordination and for perceiving where the limbs are during active movements.

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

Damage to the cerebellum also affects cogni-

tive processes, although these deficits are less obvi-

ous compared to the pronounced disturbances of

sensory–motor function. Some of the earliest studies implicating the cerebellum in a range of cognitive tasks involved functional imaging to study the brain activity during behavior in healthy individuals. For example, in a study using positron emission tomography to image the brain activity of subjects during silent reading, reading aloud, and speech, areas of the cerebellum involved in the control of mouth movements were more active when subjects read aloud than when they read silently. Surprisingly, however, cerebellar activation was more pronounced in a task with greater cognitive

A

Abnormal Normal

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 910

load, when subjects were asked to name a verb associ-

ated with a noun; a subject might respond with "bark"

if he or she saw the word "dog." Compared with sim-

ply reading aloud, the word-association task produced a pronounced increase in activity within the right lateral cerebellum. Consistent with this finding, a patient with damage in the right cerebellum could not learn a word-association task. By now, many studies have revealed clear deficits in executive function, visual spatial cognition, language, and emotional processing after cerebellar

Figure 37–1 (Left) Typical defects observed in cerebellar damage. There appears to be some regional specificity within the cerebellum for different types of cognitive function. Damage to the midline cerebellum or vermis seems to be related to emotional or affective dysregulation, likely due to its interconnectivity with limbic structures. Damage to the right cerebellar hemisphere is related to language and verbal dysfunction, presumably because this hemisphere is interconnected with the left cerebral cortical hemisphere. Likewise, damage to the left cerebellar hemisphere is related to visuospatial dysfunction, probably because this hemisphere is interconnected with the right cerebral cortical hemisphere. Additionally, studies that examine cognitive dysfunction produce variable results; patients perform normally in one study but not another. Some studies show that cognitive deficits are most pronounced when patients are tested shortly after damage to the cerebellum and that compensations at the level of cerebral cortex might gradually make up for

diseases.

A. A cerebellar patient moving his arm from a raised position to

touch the tip of his nose exhibits inaccuracy in range and direction (dysmetria) and moves his shoulder and elbow separately

(decomposition of movement). Tremor increases as the finger approaches the nose. B. Failure of compensation for interaction torques can account for cerebellar ataxia. Subjects flex their elbows while keeping their shoulder stable. In both the control subject and the

cerebellar patient, the net elbow torque is large because the elbow is moved. In the control subject, there is relatively little net shoulder torque because the interaction torques are automatically cancelled by muscle torques. In the cerebellar patient, this compensation fails; the muscle torques are present but are inappropriate to cancel the interaction torques. As a result, the patient cannot flex her elbow without causing a large perturbation of her shoulder position. (Adapted, with permission, from Bastian, Zackowski, and Thach 2000.) C. A subject was asked to alternately pronate and supinate the forearm while flexing and extending at the elbow as rapidly as possible. Position traces of the hand and forearm show the nor-

mal pattern of alternating movements and the irregular pattern (dysdiadochokinesia) typical of cerebellar disorder.

11/12/20 12:18 PM
Part V / Movement

Damage to the cerebellum also affects cogni-

tive processes, although these deficits are less obvi-

ous compared to the pronounced disturbances of

sensory–motor function. Some of the earliest studies implicating the cerebellum in a range of cognitive tasks involved functional imaging to study the brain activity during behavior in healthy individuals. For example, in a study using positron emission tomography to image the brain activity of subjects during silent reading, reading aloud, and speech, areas of the cerebellum involved in the control of mouth movements were more active when subjects read aloud than when they read silently. Surprisingly, however, cerebellar activation was more pronounced in a task with greater cognitive

A

Abnormal Normal

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 910

load, when subjects were asked to name a verb associ-

ated with a noun; a subject might respond with "bark"

if he or she saw the word "dog." Compared with sim-

ply reading aloud, the word-association task produced a pronounced increase in activity within the right lateral cerebellum. Consistent with this finding, a patient with damage in the right cerebellum could not learn a word-association task. By now, many studies have revealed clear deficits in executive function, visual spatial cognition, language, and emotional processing after cerebellar

Figure 37–1 (Left) Typical defects observed in cerebellar damage. There appears to be some regional specificity within the cerebellum for different types of cognitive function. Damage to the midline cerebellum or vermis seems to be related to emotional or affective dysregulation, likely due to its interconnectivity with limbic structures. Damage to the right cerebellar hemisphere is related to language and verbal dysfunction, presumably because this hemisphere is interconnected with the left cerebral cortical hemisphere. Likewise, damage to the left cerebellar hemisphere is related to visuospatial dysfunction, probably because this hemisphere is interconnected with the right cerebral cortical hemisphere. Additionally, studies that examine cognitive dysfunction produce variable results; patients perform normally in one study but not another. Some studies show that cognitive deficits are most pronounced when patients are tested shortly after damage to the cerebellum and that compensations at the level of cerebral cortex might gradually make up for

diseases.

A. A cerebellar patient moving his arm from a raised position to

touch the tip of his nose exhibits inaccuracy in range and direction (dysmetria) and moves his shoulder and elbow separately

(decomposition of movement). Tremor increases as the finger approaches the nose. B. Failure of compensation for interaction torques can account for cerebellar ataxia. Subjects flex their elbows while keeping their shoulder stable. In both the control subject and the

cerebellar patient, the net elbow torque is large because the elbow is moved. In the control subject, there is relatively little net shoulder torque because the interaction torques are automatically cancelled by muscle torques. In the cerebellar patient, this compensation fails; the muscle torques are present but are inappropriate to cancel the interaction torques. As a result, the patient cannot flex her elbow without causing a large perturbation of her shoulder position. (Adapted, with permission, from Bastian, Zackowski, and Thach 2000.) C. A subject was asked to alternately pronate and supinate the forearm while flexing and extending at the elbow as rapidly as possible. Position traces of the hand and forearm show the nor-

mal pattern of alternating movements and the irregular pattern (dysdiadochokinesia) typical of cerebellar disorder.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

cerebellar loss of function. However, cognitive deficits

may be more robust and long lasting when cerebellar

damage is acquired in childhood.

Thus, cognitive deficits arising from cerebellar damage sometimes can be difficult to characterize. What is clear is that the motor dysfunction after cer-

ebellar loss is more obvious than cognitive dysfunction. It may be that cortical regions of motor control are less able to compensate for losses of cerebellar motor control compared to cortical compensation for impairment of cerebellar computations involved in cognitive processes. The Cerebellum Indirectly Controls Movement

Through Other Brain Structures

## Understanding the anatomy of the cerebellum and how it interacts with different brain structures is vital

to understanding its function. In this section, we con-

sider the general anatomy of the cerebellum as well as its inputs and outputs. The Cerebellum Is a Large Subcortical Brain Structure

## The cerebellum occupies most of the posterior cranial fossa. It is composed of an outer mantle of gray mat-

ter (the cerebellar cortex), internal white matter, and

three pairs of deep nuclei: the fastigial nucleus, the interposed nucleus (itself composed of the emboliform and globose nuclei), and the dentate nucleus (Figure 37–2A). The surface of the cerebellum is highly convoluted, with many parallel folds or folia (Latin, leaves). Two deep transverse fissures divide the cerebellum into three lobes. The primary fissure on the dorsal surface separates the anterior and posterior lobes,

which together form the body of the cerebellum (Figure 37–2A). The posterolateral fissure on the ventral surface separates the body of the cerebellum from the smaller flocculonodular lobe (Figure 37–2B). Each lobe extends across the cerebellum from the midline to the most lateral tip. In the orthogonal, anteriorposterior direction, two longitudinal furrows separate three regions: the midline vermis (Latin, worm) and the two cerebellar hemispheres, each split into intermediate and lateral regions (Figure 37–2D). The cerebellum is connected to the dorsal aspect of the brain stem by three symmetrical pairs of peduncles: the inferior cerebellar peduncle (also called the

restiform body), the middle cerebellar peduncle (or brachium pontis), and the superior cerebellar peduncle (or brachium conjunctivum). Most of the output axons

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 911

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


of the cerebellum arise from the deep nuclei and pro-

ject through the superior cerebellar peduncle to other

brain areas. The main exception is a group of Purkinje

cells in the flocculonodular lobe that project to vestibular nuclei in the brain stem. The Cerebellum Connects With the Cerebral Cortex Through Recurrent Loops

## Many parts of the cerebellum form recurrent loops with the cerebral cortex. The cerebral cortex projects to the lateral cerebellum through relays in the pon-

tine nuclei. In turn, the lateral cerebellum projects back to the cerebral cortex through relays in the thalamus. Peter Strick and his colleagues used viruses for transneuronal tracing in nonhuman primates to show that this recurrent circuit is organized as a series of parallel closed loops, where a given part of the cerebellum connects reciprocally with a specific part of the cerebral cortex (Figure 37–3A). Through these reciprocal connections, the cerebellum interacts with vast regions of the neocortex, including substantial connections to motor, prefrontal, and posterior parietal regions. More recently, Strick's group also demonstrated disynaptic connections between the cerebellum and basal ganglia in nonhuman primates. The resting state connectivity between the cerebellum and cerebral cortex in humans was studied using fMRI scans of 1,000 subjects. Correlations in activity in

different regions of the brain were assessed at low frequencies, measured by blood flow while subjects were at rest. They found that different regions of the cerebellum are functionally connected with cerebral cortical regions across the entire cerebral cortex (Figure 37–3C). Taken together, these studies demonstrate the vast impact the cerebellum could have on many aspects of brain function. Different Movements Are Controlled by Functional Longitudinal Zones

## The cerebellum can be broadly divided into three areas that have distinctive roles in different kinds of move -

ments: the vestibulocerebellum, spinocerebellum, and

cerebrocerebellum (Figure 37–4). The vestibulocerebellum consists of the flocculonod -ular lobe and is the most primitive part of the cerebellum. It receives vestibular and visual inputs, projects to

the vestibular nuclei in the brain stem, and participates in balance, other vestibular reflexes, and eye movements. It receives information from the semicircular canals and the otolith organs, which sense the head's motion and its position relative to gravity. Most of this

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

A Dorsal view

1988.)

Caudate

nucleus

Putamen

Internal

A. Part of the right hemisphere has been cut away to reveal the underlying cerebellar peduncles. B. The cerebellum is shown detached from the brain stem.

<!-- image -->

vestibular input arises from the vestibular nuclei in the

brain stem. The vestibulocerebellum also receives vis

-

ual input, from both the pretectal nuclei that lie deep

in the midbrain beneath the superior colliculus and the primary and secondary visual cortex through the pontine and pretectal nuclei. The vestibulocerebellum is unique in that its output bypasses the deep cerebellar nuclei and proceeds directly to the vestibular nuclei in the brain Culmen IV, V

Primary

ssure

Declive


Folium

VIIa

Tuber

VIIb

Pyramis


Uvula IX

lobules are labeled with their Latin names and Larsell's Roman

numeral designations. (Reproduced, with permission, from Larsell and Jansen 1972.) D. Functional regions of the cerebellum.

during stance and gait (Figure 37–5A). Disruption of

these projections through lesions or disease impairs

equilibrium.

The most striking deficits following lesions of the lateral vestibulocerebellum are in smooth-pursuit eye movement toward the side of the lesion. A patient

stem. Purkinje cells in the midline parts of the vestibulocerebellum project to the lateral vestibular nucleus to modulate the lateral and medial ves tibulospinal tracts, which predominantly control axial muscles and limb extensors to assure balance

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 912

-with a lesion of the left lateral vestibulocerebellum can smoothly track a target that is moving to the right, but only poorly tracks motion to the left, using saccades predominantly (Figure 37–6A). These patients can have normal vestibulo-ocular reflex responses to head rotations but cannot suppress the reflex by fixating an object that rotates with the head (Figure 37–6B). These deficits occur commonly if the lateral

11/12/20 12:18 PM

C Midsagittal section A Cortical-cerebellar circuit Rabies virus H129

<!-- image -->

Leg

<!-- image -->

from Bostan, Dum, and Strick 2013. Copyright © 2013 Elsevier

Ltd. part C adapted, with permission, from Buckner et al. 2011. Copyright © 2011 American Physiological Society.) A. The cortical-cerebellar circuit in monkeys was traced with fluorescence-labeled transsynaptic viruses that can move in an anterograde or retrograde direction. Injection into the cerebral

cortex of a retrograde virus, such as rabies virus, will label neurons that project to it and, by crossing synapses, can label second- and possibly higher-order neurons in a pathway. These are shown here in red as first-order (thalamus), second-order (deep nucleus), and third-order neurons (Purkinje cells). Injection into the cerebral cortex of an anterograde virus, such as the H129 strain of herpes simplex virus, will label neurons that are targets of the cerebral cortex. These are shown here in yellow as first-order (pons), second-order (granule cells), and third-order neurons (Purkinje cells). (Abbreviations: DN, dentate

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 913

Pre SMA

1st

order

2nd

order Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum C Cortical-cerebellar connections in the human PF

nuclei; GC, granule cell; H129, strain of herpes simplex virus;

<!-- image -->

B. Areas of the cerebral cortex connected to the cerebellum.

The numbers refer to cytoarchitectonic areas. (Abbreviations: AIP, anterior intraparietal area; M1, face, arm, and leg areas of

the primary motor cortex; PMd arm, arm area of the dorsal premotor area; PMv arm, arm area of the ventral premotor area; PrePMd, predorsal premotor area; PreSMA, presupplementary motor area; SMA arm, arm area of the supplementary motor area.) C. Color-coded coronal section of the human cerebellum (top) and lateral and medial views of the human cerebral cortex (bottom) created from resting state functional connectivity

maps (based on functional magnetic resonance imaging scans of 1,000 subjects). Colors correspond to cerebellar and cerebral areas that are connected. Note that the cerebellum is function -ally connected with nearly all cerebral areas. (Abbreviations: HF, horizontal fissure; PF, primary fissure.)

11/12/20 12:18 PM



Part V / Movement

Cerebrocerebellum Spinocerebellum

Association Vestibulocerebellum Somatosensory Vestibulocerebellar paths

(and spinocerebellar and

pontocerebellar paths)

<!-- image -->

Somatosensory

Figure 37–4 The three functional regions of the cerebel-

lum have different inputs and different output targets.  The

cerebellum is shown unfolded, and arrows indicate the inputs

and outputs of the different functional areas. The body maps in

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 914

the deep nuclei are based on anatomical tracing and single-cell

recordings in nonhuman primates. (Abbreviations: D, dentate

nucleus; F, fastigial nucleus; IP, interposed nucleus.) (Adapted,

with permission, from Brooks and Thach 1981).

Somatosensory

11/12/20 12:18 PM

Pid

Primary and

premotor

cortex Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


Primary and

premotor

cortex

Thalamus

(ventrolateral

nucleus)

Red nucleus

Interposed

+

<!-- image -->

Figure 37–5 Input and output pathways of the

cerebellum.

A. Nuclei in the vestibulocerebellum and the vermis control

## proximal muscles and limb extensors. The vestibulocerebel-

lum (flocculonodular lobe) receives input from the vestibular

labyrinth and projects directly to the vestibular nuclei. The vermis receives input from the neck and trunk, the vestibular labyrinth, and retinal and extraocular muscles. Its output is focused on the ventromedial descending systems of the brain stem, mainly the reticulospinal and vestibulospinal tracts and the corticospinal fibers acting on medial motor neurons. The

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 915

oculomotor connections of the vestibular nuclei have been

omitted for clarity.

B. Nuclei in the intermediate and lateral parts of the cerebellar

hemispheres control limb and axial muscles. The intermediate part of each hemisphere (spinocerebellum) receives sen-

sory information from the limbs and controls the dorsolateral descending systems (rubrospinal and corticospinal tracts) acting on the ipsilateral limbs. The lateral area of each hemisphere (cerebrocerebellum) receives cortical input via the pontine nuclei and influences the motor and premotor cortices via the ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus, and directly influences the red nucleus.

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement


Position Target Gaze Leftward head rotation Rightward head rotation

<!-- image -->

A. Sinusoidal target motion is tracked with smooth-pursuit eye

movements as the target moves from left (L) to right (R). With a lesion of the left vestibulocerebellum, smooth pursuit is punctu-

ated by saccades when the target moves from right to left. B. In the same patient, responses to vestibular stimulation are normal, whereas object fixation is disrupted during leftward rotation. The traces on the left and right show the eye move-

ments evoked by rightward and leftward head rotation experienced in separate sessions. In each session the patient sat in a vestibulocerebellum is compressed by an acoustic

neuroma, a benign tumor that grows on the eighth

cranial nerve as it courses directly beneath the lateral

vestibulocerebellum. The spinocerebellum is composed of the vermis and intermediate parts of the cerebellar hemispheres (Figure 37–4). It is so named because it receives exten-

sive input from the spinal cord via the dorsal and ventral spinocerebellar tracts. These pathways convey information about touch, pressure, and limb position as well as the spiking activity of spinal interneurons. Thus, these inputs provide the cerebellum with varied information about the changing state of the organism and its environment. The vermis receives visual, auditory, and vestibular input as well as somatic sensory input from the head and proximal parts of the body. It projects by

way of the fastigial nucleus to cortical and brain stem

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 916

2 Normal xation only

during rightward

rotation when leftward

VOR is suppressed

chair that rotated continuously in one direction, first in the dark

then in the light while fixating on a target that moves along

with him. (1) In the dark, the eyes show a normal vestibulo-

ocular reflex (VOR) during rotation in both directions: The eyes move smoothly in the direction opposite to the head's rotation, then reset with saccades in the direction of head rotation. (2) In the light, the eye position during rightward head rotation is normal: Fixation on the target is excellent and the vestibulo-ocular reflex is suppressed. During leftward head rotation, however, the subject is unable to fixate on the object and the vestibuloocular reflex cannot be suppressed. regions that give rise to the medial descending systems

controlling proximal muscles of the body and limbs

(Figure 37–5A). The vermis governs posture and loco-

motion as well as eye movements. For example, lesions of the oculomotor region of the vermis cause saccadic eye movements that overshoot their target, much as patients with cerebellar damage make arm movements that overshoot their target. The adjacent intermediate parts of the hemispheres also receive somatosensory input from the limbs. Neurons here project to the interposed nucleus, which

provides inputs to lateral corticospinal and rubrospinal systems on the contralateral side of the brain and controls the more distal muscles of the limbs and digits (Figure 37–5B). Because corticospinal and rubrospinal systems cross the midline as they descend to the spinal cord, cerebellar lesions disrupt ipsilateral limb movements.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

The cerebrocerebellum comprises the lateral parts of

the hemispheres (Figure 37–4). These areas are phylo-

genetically the most recent and are much larger rela-

tive to the rest of the cerebellum in humans and apes than in monkeys and cats. Almost all of the inputs to and outputs from this region involve connections with the cerebral cortex. The output is transmitted through the dentate nucleus, which projects via the thalamus to contralateral motor, premotor, parietal, and prefrontal cortices. The dentate nucleus also projects to the contralateral red nucleus. The lateral hemispheres have many functions but seem to participate most extensively in planning and executing movement. They also have a role in cognitive functions unconnected with motor planning, such as visuospatial and language processes. There is now some correlative evidence implicating the cerebellar hemispheres in aspects of schizophrenia (Chapter 60), dystonia (Chapter 38), and autism (Chapter 62). Two important principles of cerebellar function have emerged from recordings of the action potentials of single neurons in the cerebellar cortex and deep

cerebellar nuclei during arm movements, along with controlled, temporary inactivation of specific cerebellar regions. First, neurons in these areas discharge vigorously in relation to voluntary movements. Cerebellar output is related to the direction and speed of movement.

The deep nuclei are organized into somatotopic maps of different limbs and joints, as in the motor cortex, although the organization of the cerebellar cortex has been characterized as "fractured somatotopy" with multiple disconnected and partial maps. Moreover, the interval between the onset of modulation of the firing of cerebellar neurons and movement is remarkably similar to that for neurons in the motor cortex. This result emphasizes the cerebellum's participation in recurrent circuits that operate synchronously with the cerebral cortex. Second, the cerebellum provides feedforward control of muscle contractions to regulate the timing of movements. Rather than awaiting sensory feedback, Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


the movement. When the dentate and interposed

nuclei are experimentally inactivated, however, con-

traction of the antagonist muscle is delayed until the

limb has overshot its target. The programmed anticipatory contraction of the antagonist in normal movements is replaced by a correction driven by sensory feedback. This correction is itself dysmetric and results in another error, necessitating a new adjustment (Figure 37–7).

Interposed and

dentate nuclei

<!-- image -->


°


°

/s

0 700 ms

tion during rapid movements.  The interposed (medial)

and dentate (lateral) nuclei are highlighted in the drawing of the cerebellum. The records of limb movement show how

cerebellar output anticipates the muscular contractions that will be needed to bring a movement smoothly, accurately, and quickly to its desired endpoint. Failure of these mechanisms causes the intention tremor of cerebellar disorders. For example, a rapid single-joint movement is initiated by the contraction of an agonist muscle and terminated by an appropriately timed contraction of the antagonist. The contraction of the antagonist starts early in the movement, well before there has been time for sensory feedback to reach the brain, and therefore must be programmed as part of

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 917

a monkey normally makes a rapid elbow flexion limb movement and attempts to make the same movement when the interposed and dentate nuclei are inactivated by cooling. The electromyographic (EMG) traces show limb position and velocity and EMG responses of the biceps and triceps muscles. When the deep nuclei are inactivated, activation of the agonist (biceps) becomes slower and more prolonged. Activation of the antagonist (triceps), which is needed to stop the movement at the correct location, is likewise delayed and protracted so that the initial movement overshoots its appropriate extent. Delays in successive phases of the movement produce oscillations similar to the terminal tremor seen in patients with cerebellar damage.

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

The Cerebellar Cortex Comprises Repeating

Functional Units Having the Same

Basic Microcircuit

## The cellular organization of the microcircuit in the cerebellar cortex is striking, and one of the premises

of cerebellar research has been that the details of the

microcircuit are an important clue to how the cerebellum works. In this section, we describe three major features of the microcircuit. The Cerebellar Cortex Is Organized Into Three Functionally Specialized Layers

## The three layers of the cerebellar cortex contain distinct kinds of neurons and are functionally specialized (Figure 37–8).

The deepest, or granular layer, is the input layer. It contains a vast number of granule cells, estimated at 100 billion, which appear in histological sections

as small, densely packed, darkly stained nuclei. The granular layer also contains a few larger Golgi cells and, in some cerebellar regions, a smattering of other neurons such as cells of Lugaro, unipolar brush cells, and chandelier cells. The mossy fibers, one of the two principal afferent inputs to the cerebellum, terminate in this layer. The bulbous terminals of the mossy fibers excite granule cells and Golgi neurons in synaptic complexes called cerebellar glomeruli (Figure 37–8). As we will see later when discussing recurrent circuits in the cerebellum, Golgi cells inhibit granule cells. The middle or Purkinje cell layer is the output layer of the cerebellar cortex. This layer consists of a single sheet of Purkinje cell bodies, each 50 to 80 μm in

diameter. The fan-like dendritic trees of Purkinje cells extend upward into the molecular layer where they receive inputs from the second major type of afferent to the cerebellum, the climbing fibers, as well as from granule cells and inhibitory interneurons. Purkinje cell axons conduct the entire output of the cerebellar cortex, projecting to the deep nuclei in the underlying white matter or to the vestibular nuclei in the brain stem, where they release the inhibitory transmitter GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid). The outermost or molecular layer contains the spatially polarized dendrites of Purkinje cells, which extend approximately 1 to 3 mm in the anterior-posterior

direction but occupy only a very narrow territory in the medial-lateral direction. The molecular layer contains the cell bodies and dendrites of two types of "molecular layer interneurons," the stellate and basket cells, both of which inhibit Purkinje cells. It also contains the axons of the granule cells, called the parallel

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 918

fibers because they run parallel to the long axis of the

folia (Figure 37–8). Parallel fibers run perpendicular to

the dendritic trees of the Purkinje cells and thus have the

potential to form a few synapses with each of a large number of Purkinje cells. The Climbing-Fiber and Mossy-Fiber Afferent Systems Encode and Process Information Differently

## The two main types of afferent fibers in the cerebellum, the mossy fibers and climbing fibers, probably medi-

ate different functions. Both form excitatory synapses

with neurons in the deep cerebellar nuclei and in the cerebellar cortex. However, they terminate in different layers of the cerebellar cortex, affect Purkinje cells through very different patterns of synaptic convergence and divergence, and produce different electrical events in the Purkinje cells. Climbing fibers originate in the inferior olivary nucleus in the brain stem and convey sensory information to the cerebellum from both the periphery and the

cerebral cortex. The climbing fiber is so named because each one wraps around the proximal dendrites of a Purkinje neuron like a vine on a tree, making numerous synaptic contacts (Figure 37–9). Each Purkinje neuron receives synaptic input from only a single climbing fiber, but each climbing fiber contacts 1 to 10 Purkinje cells that are arranged topographically along a parasagittal strip in the cerebellar cortex. Indeed, the axons from clusters of related olivary neurons terminate in thin parasagittal strips that extend across several folia, and the Purkinje cells from one strip converge on a common group of neurons in the deep nuclei. Climbing fibers have an unusually powerful influence on the electrical activity of Purkinje cells. Each action potential in a climbing fiber generates a pro-

tracted, voltage-gated Ca 2+ conductance in the soma and dendrites of the postsynaptic Purkinje cell. This results in prolonged depolarization that produces an electrical event called a "complex spike": an initial large-amplitude action potential followed by a highfrequency burst of smaller-amplitude action potentials (Figure 37–9). Whether these smaller spikes are transmitted down the Purkinje cell's axon is not clear. In awake animals, complex spikes occur spontaneously at low rates, usually around one per second. Specific sensory or motor events cause one or two complex spikes that occur at precise times in relation to those events. Mossy fibers originate from cell bodies in the spinal cord and brain stem. They carry sensory information from the periphery as well as both sensory information

and corollary discharges that report the current movement command (Chapter 30) from the cerebral cortex

11/12/20 12:18 PM

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum

<!-- image -->

Figure 37–8 The cerebellar cortex contains five main

types of neurons organized into three layers. A vertical

section of a single cerebellar folium illustrates the general

organization of the cerebellar cortex. The detail of a cerebellar glomerulus in the granular layer is also shown. A

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 919


Golgi

cell

axon

Mossy ber

terminal

glomerulus is the synaptic complex formed by the bulbous

axon terminal of a mossy fiber and the dendrites of several

Golgi and granule cells. Mitochondria are present in all of

the structures in the glomerulus, consistent with their high metabolic activity.

11/12/20 12:18 PM
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum

<!-- image -->

Figure 37–8 The cerebellar cortex contains five main

types of neurons organized into three layers. A vertical

section of a single cerebellar folium illustrates the general

organization of the cerebellar cortex. The detail of a cerebellar glomerulus in the granular layer is also shown. A

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 919


Golgi

cell

axon

Mossy ber

terminal

glomerulus is the synaptic complex formed by the bulbous

axon terminal of a mossy fiber and the dendrites of several

Golgi and granule cells. Mitochondria are present in all of

the structures in the glomerulus, consistent with their high metabolic activity.

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

Parallel

bers Purkinje cell Climbing

<!-- image -->

50 ms

produced by mossy-fiber input (1), whereas complex spikes are

evoked by climbing-fiber synapses (2). (Reproduced, with permission, from Martinez, Crill, and Kennedy 1971.)

via the pontine nuclei. Mossy fibers affect Purkinje

cells via multisynaptic pathways that have intriguing

patterns of convergence and divergence. Individual

mossy fibers, acting through granule cells and parallel fibers, have a tiny influence on Purkinje cell output, but collectively, the whole population of mossy fibers has massive effects on cerebellar output. Mossy fibers form excitatory synapses on the dendrites of granule cells in the granular layer (Figure 37–8). Each granule cell has three to five short dendrites, and

each dendrite receives contacts from a single mossy fiber. Due to this paucity of inputs, the spatial integration by a granule cell of its different mossy fiber synapses is not extensive; however, the cell can be the site of convergence of mossy fibers from multiple sensory modalities and motor corollary discharge. The next synaptic relay, between the granule cell axons and Purkinje cells, distributes information with very wide divergence and convergence. The parallel fibers allow each mossy fiber to influence a large number

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 920

10 mV

of Purkinje cells, and each Purkinje cell is contacted

potentially by axons from somewhere between 200,000

and 1 million granule cells. Importantly, in response

to changing conditions there seems to be tremendous potential for adaptation of cerebellar output at the synapses between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells. It appears that only a small fraction of these synapses are active at any given time. Parallel fibers produce brief, small excitatory potentials in Purkinje cells (Figure 37–9). These potentials converge in the cell body and spread to the initial

segment of the axon where they generate conventional action potentials called "simple spikes" that propagate down the axon. In awake animals, Purkinje cells emit a steady stream of simple spikes, with spontaneous firing rates as high as 100 per second even when an animal is sitting quietly. Purkinje cells fire at rates as high as several hundred spikes per second during active eye, arm, and face movements. The climbing-fiber and mossy-fiber/parallel-fiber systems seem to be specialized for transmission of different kinds of information. Climbing fibers cause

complex spikes that seem specialized for event detection. Although complex spikes occur only infrequently, synchronous firing in multiple climbing fibers enables them to signal important events. Synchrony seems to arise partly because signaling between many neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus occurs electrotonically (at gap-junction channels). In contrast, the high firing rates of the simple spikes in Purkinje cells can be modulated up or down in a graded way by mossyfiber inputs, and thereby encode the magnitude and duration of peripheral stimuli or centrally generated behaviors. The Cerebellar Microcircuit Architecture Suggests a Canonical Computation

## The cerebellar microcircuit is replicated many times across the surface of the cerebellar cortex. This repeating architecture and pattern of convergence and diver-

gence has led to the suggestion that since every such module has the same architecture and pattern of convergence and divergence, the cerebellar cortex performs the same basic "canonical" computation on all of its inputs, and that it potentially transforms cerebellar inputs in a similar way for all cerebellar output systems. Inspection of a diagram of the cerebellar microcircuit (Figure 37–10) reveals a number of different computational components. One general feature is the existence of parallel excitatory and inhibitory pathways to the Purkinje cells or deep cerebellar nuclei. The other general feature is the prevalence of recurrent loops.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

Parallel

ber

<!-- image -->

cortex and in the deep nuclei. Recurrent loops involve Golgi

cells within the cerebellar cortex and the inferior olive outside the cerebellum. (Adapted, with permission, from Raymond, Lisberger, and Mauk 1996. Copyright © 1996 AAAS.) Parallel Feedforward Excitatory and Inhibitory Pathways

The excitatory inputs relayed from mossy fibers to

## granule cells to Purkinje cells work in parallel with feedforward inhibitory inputs through the two molec-

ular layer interneurons, the stellate and basket cells. Both of these interneurons receive inputs from parallel fibers and inhibit Purkinje cells, but they have quite different architectures. The short axons of stellate cells contact the nearby dendrites of Purkinje cells. Thus, a stellate cell acts locally in the sense that it and the Purkinje cell it inhib-

its are excited by the same parallel fibers. In contrast, a basket cell acts more widely. Its axon runs perpendicular to the parallel fibers (Figure 37–8) and creates flanks of inhibition on Purkinje cells that receive input from parallel fibers other than those that excite the basket cell. Stellate cells affect Purkinje cells via synapses that are on distal dendrites, whereas basket cells make powerful synapses on the cell body of Purkinje cells and seem to be positioned for a powerful influence on

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 921

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


Purkinje cell simple spiking. Remarkably, even 60 years

after the architecture of the cerebellar microcircuit

was described, the functional role of molecular layer

interneurons remains a mystery. Convergence of excitatory and inhibitory pathways is a predominant feature also in the deep cerebellar nuclei. Here, inhibitory inputs from Purkinje

Climbing ber Inferior olivary nucleus cell cells converge with excitatory inputs from axon collaterals of mossy and climbing fibers (Figure 37–10). Thus, a mossy fiber affects target neurons in the deep nuclei in two ways: directly by excitatory synapses and indirectly by pathways through the cerebellar cortex and the inhibitory Purkinje cells. Neurons of the deep cerebellar nuclei are active spontaneously even in the absence of synaptic inputs, so the inhibitory output of the Purkinje cells both modulates this intrinsic activity and sculpts the excitatory signals transmitted from mossy fibers to the deep nuclei. In almost all parts of the cerebellum, collaterals from climbing fibers to the deep cerebellar nuclei create the opportunity for a similar interaction of excitatory and inhibitory inputs. Recurrent Loops

An important recurrent loop is contained entirely

within the cerebellar cortex and employs Golgi cells to

sculpt the activity of the granule cells, the input ele-

ments in the cerebellar cortex. Golgi cells receive a few large excitatory inputs from mossy fibers, many smaller excitatory inputs from parallel fibers, and inhibitory inputs from neighboring Golgi cells. The GABAergic terminals from Golgi cells inhibit granule cells (Figure 37–10) and thereby regulate the activity of granule cells and the signals conveyed by the parallel fibers. This loop is evidence that important processing may occur within the granular layer. It may shorten the duration of bursts in granule cells, limiting the magnitude of the excitatory response of granule cells to their mossy fiber inputs, or could ensure that the granule cells respond only when a certain number of their mossy fiber inputs are active. A second recurrent loop provides Purkinje cells with a way to regulate their own climbing fiber inputs (Figure 37–10). Purkinje cells inhibit GABAergic inhib-

itory neurons in the deep cerebellar nuclei that project to the inferior olive. When the simple-spike firing of a group of Purkinje cells decreases, the activity of these inhibitory interneurons increases, leading to decreases in the excitability of neurons in the inferior olive. The decreased excitability of the inferior olive reduces both the probability of action potentials in climbing fibers that project to the original group of Purkinje cells and the duration of each burst of climbing fiber action

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

potentials. In the section on cerebellar learning, we

will see how this recurrent loop could allow the cer-

ebellar cortex to control the inputs that cause adaptive

changes in the synapses on its Purkinje cells. The Cerebellum Is Hypothesized to Perform

Several General Computational Functions

## We know that the cerebellum is important for motor control and some nonmotor functions. Even though we

do not yet know how the cerebellar circuit controls these

functions, we are able to identity aspects of the control that seem to be particularly "cerebellar." These include reliable feedforward control, internal control of timing, integration of sensory inputs with corollary discharge, and state estimation through internal models. The Cerebellum Contributes to Feedforward

Sensorimotor Control

## Sensory feedback is by its nature delayed. Therefore, when a movement is initiated there is a period of time

before any useful sensory feedback is received about

the movement. We saw earlier that cerebellar damage causes movement disorders that appear to result from out-of-date sensory feedback. If so, it is reasonable to assume that the cerebellum regulates and coordinates movement by preprogramming and coordinating commands for muscular contraction prior to the arrival of useful sensory feedback. The cerebellar output anticipates the muscular contractions that will be needed to bring a movement smoothly, accurately, and quickly to the desired endpoint, and uses sensory feedback mainly to monitor and improve its own performance. Like neurons in the motor cortex, cerebellar neurons are activated before movement. Still, lesion studies and the symptoms in human motor disorders

imply that the cerebellum and motor cortex play very different roles in movement. Lesions of the cerebellum disrupt the accuracy and coordination of voluntary movement, while lesions of the cerebral cortex largely prevent movement. In addition, the pattern of cerebellar activity, not simply the rate of activity, conveys information for movement control. This is illustrated in mouse models

of cerebellar disease. Deletion of certain ion channels produces excessive variability of Purkinje cell simplespike firing patterns, which seems to lead to ataxia. This suggests that the regularity of cerebellar activity must be closely regulated to achieve normal movement.

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 922

The Cerebellum Incorporates an Internal Model of

the Motor Apparatus

## To program the correct muscle contractions for a smooth, accurate arm movement, the cerebellum needs

to have some information about the physical configu-

ration of the arm. Thus, it needs to create and maintain what are called "internal models" of the motor apparatus (Chapter 30). Internal models allow the cerebellum to perform a computation that helps the brain make good estimates of the exact muscle forces needed to move an arm in a desired manner. An accurate inverse dynamic model of the arm, for example, can process sensory data about the current posture of the arm and automatically generate a

sequence of properly timed and scaled commands to move the hand to a new desired position. An accurate forward dynamic model does the opposite: It processes a copy of a motor command and makes a prediction about the upcoming kinematics (ie, position and speed) of the arm movement. Recordings of the output of the cerebellum have provided evidence compatible with the idea that the cerebellum contains both types of models and that they are used to program both arm and eye movements. One reason that the cerebellum may need these types of models for motor control is because of the complexities associated with moving linked segments of the

body. Consider the mechanics of making a simple arm movement. Because of the mechanics of the arm and the momentum it develops when moving, movement of the forearm alone causes inertial forces that passively move the upper arm. If a subject wants to flex or extend the elbow without simultaneously moving the shoulder, then muscles acting at the shoulder must contract to prevent its movement. These stabilizing contractions of the shoulder joint occur almost perfectly in healthy subjects but not in patients with cerebellar damage, who experience difficulty controlling the inertial interactions among multiple segments of a limb (Figure 37–1B). As a result, patients exhibit greater inaccuracy of multi-joint versus single-joint movements. In conclusion, the cerebellum uses internal models to allow it to preprogram a sequence of muscle contractions that will generate smooth, accurate movement. It

also anticipates the forces that result from the mechanical properties of a moving limb. We do not yet know what these internal models look like in terms of the activity of cerebellar neurons, the circuits that operate as internal models, or how the cerebellar output is transformed into muscle forces. However, given that the properties of the limbs change throughout life, we can be confident that the cerebellum's learning capabilities

11/12/20 12:18 PM

are involved in adapting these internal models to help

generate the most proficient movements.

The Cerebellum Integrates Sensory Inputs and Corollary Discharge

## Sensory signals converge in the cerebellum with motor signals that are called a corollary discharge (or efference copy) because they report commands that are

being sent to motor nerves at the same time. For example, some neurons in the dorsal spinocerebellar tract relay inputs from sensory afferents in the spinal cord and transmit sensory signals to the cerebellum. In contrast, the neurons in the spinal cord that give rise to the axons in the ventral spinocerebellar tract receive the same afferent and descending inputs as do spinal motor neurons, and they transmit the final motor command back to the cerebellum. The interaction of sensory signals and corollary discharge allows comparison of the plans for a movement with the sensory consequences. This comparison occurs to some degree at Purkinje cells, but we now know that at least some granule cells receive converging sensory and corollary discharge inputs and could perform the comparison. Internal models and corollary discharge together provide one possible explanation of the role of the cerebellum in movement. To be able to program accurate

movements the cerebellum must be able to estimate the state of the motor system through sensory feedback and knowledge of prior motor activity. Next, it must combine information on the state of the motor system with the goals of the next movement and use internal models of the effector to help create commands for muscle forces that will generate an accurate and efficient movement. During the movement, the cerebellum must monitor movement performance through sensory feedback. Current thinking is that much of this is done by an internal model that converts corollary discharge into predictions of the sensory feedback. The cerebellum then compares real and predicted sensory feedback to determine a sensory prediction error and uses the sensory prediction error to guide corrective movements and learning. Using a paradigm that required monkeys to ignore the sensory signals caused by their own movement, Kathy Cullen and colleagues have identified a neural

correlate of a sensory prediction error in the deep cerebellar nuclei. Specifically, they studied the vestibular sensory signals that result from an animal's active head movements. They showed that the brain attenuates or even eliminates the vestibular sensory signals caused by one's own active head movement in order to better detect unpredictable vestibular signals due to the

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 923

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


environment. However, when the head is effectively

made heavier by adding resistance via a mechanical

device, the vestibular sensory signals no longer match

-

the predicted sensory signals that normally would attenuate the vestibular input. They showed that the cerebellum adjusts its predictions of the vestibular input to account for the changes in head movement caused by resistance due to the mechanical device. After some practice, the predicted and actual self-generated sensory inputs again match, and neurons in the deep cerebellar nucleus return to being unresponsive to vestibular inputs. Cerebellum-dependent learning is described in detail later in this chapter. The Cerebellum Contributes to Timing Control The cerebellum seems to have a role in movement tim

## ing that goes well beyond its role in regulating the timing of contractions in different muscles (Figure 37–7).

When patients with cerebellar lesions attempt to make regular tapping movements with their hands or fingers, the rhythm is irregular and the motions vary in duration and force. Based on a theoretical model of how tapping movements are generated, Richard Ivry and Steven Keele inferred that medial cerebellar lesions interfere only

with accurate execution of the response, whereas lateral cerebellar lesions interfere with the timing of serial events. Such timing defects are not limited to motor events. They also affect the patient's ability to judge elapsed time in purely mental or cognitive tasks, as in the ability to distinguish whether one tone is longer or shorter than another or whether the speed of one moving object is greater or less than that of another. We will see in our discussion of motor learning that the cerebellum is critical for learning the timing of motor acts. The Cerebellum Participates in Motor Skill Learning

## In the early 1970s, on the basis of mathematical modeling of cerebellar function and the cerebellar micro-

circuit, David Marr and James Albus independently

suggested that the cerebellum might be involved in learning motor skills. Along with Masao Ito, they proposed that the climbing-fiber input to Purkinje cells causes changes at the synapses that relay mossy fiber input signals from parallel fibers to Purkinje cells. According to their theory, the synaptic plasticity would lead to changes in simple-spike firing, and these changes would cause behavioral learning. Subsequent experimental evidence has supported and extended this theory of cerebellar motor learning.

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

Climbing-Fiber Activity Changes the Synaptic

Efficacy of Parallel Fibers and does not appear in synapses from parallel fibers that had not been stimulated along with climbing fib-

## Climbing fibers can selectively induce long-term depression in the synapses between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells that are activated concurrently

ers (Figure 37–11A). The resulting depression can last

for minutes to hours. Many studies in a variety of motor learning systems have recorded activity in Purkinje cells that is consistent with the predictions of the cerebellar learn-

ing theory. For example, if an unexpected resistance is applied to a well-practiced arm movement, extra muscle tension will be required to move. Climbing fiber activity can signal error until the unexpected resistance is learned. They presumably depress the synaptic

Accurate movement prior to loading

<!-- image -->

with the climbing fibers. Many studies in brain slices and cultured Purkinje cells have found that concurrent stimulation of climbing fibers and parallel fibers depresses the Purkinje cell responses to subsequent stimulation of the same parallel fibers. The depression is selective for the parallel fibers that were activated in conjunction with the climbing-fiber input A B

nism for cerebellar learning.

A. Two different groups of parallel fibers and the presynaptic climbing fibers are electrically stimulated in vitro. Repeated stimulation of one set of parallel fibers (PF1) at the same

time as the climbing fibers produces a long-term reduction in the responses of those parallel fibers to later stimulation. The responses of a second set of parallel fibers (PF2) are not depressed because they are not stimulated simultaneously with the presynaptic climbing fibers. (Abbreviations: CF , climbing fiber; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential.) (Adapted from Ito et al. 1982.)

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 924

Climbing

ber res

later by discharge of a single climbing fiber in one trial. Middle:

When the monkey must make the same movement against a novel resistance (adaptation), climbing-fiber activity occurs during movement in every trial and the movement itself overshoots the target. Bottom: After adaptation, the frequency of simple spikes during movement is quite attenuated, and the climbing fiber is not active during movement or later. This is the sequence of events expected if long-term depression in the cerebellar cortex plays a role in learning. Climbing fiber activity is usually low (1/s) but increases during adaptation to a novel load. (Adapted, with permission, from Gilbert and Thach 1977.)

11/12/20 12:18 PM

strength of parallel fibers involved in generating those

errors, namely those that drove Purkinje simple-spike

firing at the time of the climbing-fiber activity (Figure

37–11B). With successive movements, the parallel-fiber inputs conveying the flawed central command are increasingly suppressed, a more appropriate pattern of simple-spike activity emerges, and eventually movement errors disappear, along with the climbing-fiber error signal. Although this kind of result is consistent with the theory of cerebellar learning, it stops short of proving that the neural and behavioral learning was caused by long-term depression of the synapses from parallel fibers onto Purkinje cells. The Cerebellum Is Necessary for Motor Learning in Several Different Movement Systems

## The cerebellum is involved in learning a wide variety of movements, ranging from limb and eye movements to walking. In each movement system, motor learning

operates to improve the feedforward control of movement. Errors render motor control transiently dependent on sensory feedback, and motor learning restores the ideal situation where performance is accurate without relying on sensory feedback. Adaptation of limb movements that rely on eye– hand coordination can be demonstrated by having people wear prisms that deflect the light path side- Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


All forms of conjugate eye movement require the

cerebellum for correct performance, and each form is

subject to motor learning that involves the cerebel-

lum. For example, the vestibulo-ocular reflex normally keeps the eyes fixed on a target when the head is rotated (Chapter 27). Motion of the head in one direction is sensed by the vestibular labyrinth, which initiates eye movements in the opposite direction to prevent visual images from slipping across the retina. When humans and experimental animals wear glasses that change the size of a visual scene, the vestibulo-ocular reflex ini -tially fails to keep images stable on the retina because the amplitude of the reflex is inappropriate to the new conditions. After the glasses have been worn continuously for several days, however, the size of the reflex becomes progressively reduced (for miniaturizing glasses) or increased (for magnifying glasses) (Figure 37–13A). These changes are required to prevent images from slipping across the retina because magnified (or miniaturized) images also move faster (or slower). The performance of the baseline vestibulo-ocular reflex does not depend heavily on the cerebellum, but its adaptation does and can be blocked in experimental animals by lesions of the lateral part of the vestibulocerebellum called the floccular complex. Saccadic eye movements also depend on the integrity of Purkinje cells in the oculomotor vermis in lobules V, VI, and VII of the vermis (Figure 37–2C). These cells

-discharge prior to and during saccades, and lesions of the vermis cause saccades to become hypermetric, much as we see in the arm movements of cerebellar patients. The outputs from neurons of the vermis concerned with saccades are transmitted through a very small region of the caudal fastigial nucleus to the saccade generator in the reticular formation. The same Purkinje cells participate in a form of motor learning called saccadic adaptation. This adaptation is demonstrated by having a monkey fixate on a

ways. When a person plays darts while wearing prism goggles that displace the entire visual field to the left, the initial dart throw lands to the left side of the tar get by an amount proportional to the strength of the prisms. The subject gradually adapts to the distortion through practice; within 10 to 30 throws, the darts land on target (Figure 37–12). When the prisms are removed, the adaptation persists, and the darts hit to the right of the target by roughly the same distance as the initial prism-induced error. Patients with a damaged cerebellar cortex or inferior olive are severely impaired or unable to adapt at all in this test. Classical conditioning of the eye-blink response also depends on an intact cerebellum. In this form of associative learning, a puff of air is directed at the cor-

nea, causing the eye to blink at the end of a neutral stimulus such as a tone. If the tone and the puff are paired repeatedly with a fixed duration of the tone, then the brain learns the tone's predictive power and the tone alone is sufficient to cause a blink. Michael Mauk and his colleagues have shown that the brain also can learn about the timing of the stimulus so that the eye blink occurs at the right time. It is even possible to learn to blink at different times in response to tones of different frequencies.

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 925

target straight ahead and then displaying a new target at an eccentric location. During the saccade to the new target, the experimenter moves the new target to a more eccentric location. Initially, the subject needs to make a second saccade to fixate on the target. Gradually, over several hundred trials, the first saccade grows in amplitude so that it brings the eye directly to the final location of the target (Figure 37–13B). Recordings during saccadic adaptation have revealed that climbing fiber inputs to the Purkinje cells in the oculomotor vermis signal saccadic errors during learning, and the simplespike firing rate of the same cells adapts gradually along with the monkey's eye movements. Thus, the oculomotor vermis is a likely site for motor learning of the amplitude of saccadic eye movements. The story

11/12/20 12:18 PM


Part V / Movement

Horizontal displacement (cm)

Horizontal displacement (cm)

Right

<!-- image -->

–50

Horizontal displacement (cm)

Left Right

–50

0 50



<!-- image -->

Figure 37–12 Adjustment of eye–hand coordination to a

change in optical conditions.  The subject wears prism gog-

gles that bend the optic path to her right. She must look to her

left along the bent light path to see the target directly ahead. (Adapted, with permission, from Martin et al. 1996). A. Without prisms, the subject throws with good accuracy (I). The first hit after the prisms have been put in place is displaced left of center because the hand throws where the eyes are

directed. Thereafter, hits trend rightward toward the target, away from where the eyes are looking (II). After removal of the prisms, the subject fixes her gaze in the center of the target; the first throw hits to the right of center, away from where the eyes are directed. Thereafter, hits trend toward the target (III).

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 926

Immediately after removing the prisms, the subject directs her

gaze toward the target; her adapted throw is to the right of the

direction of gaze and to the right of the target (IV). After recov-

ery from adaptation, she again looks at and throws toward the target (V). Data during and after prism use have been fit with exponential curves. Gaze and throw directions are indicated by the blue and brown arrows, respectively, on the right. The inferred gaze direction assumes that the subject is fixating the target. B. Adaptation fails in a patient with unilateral infarctions in the territory of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery that affect the inferior cerebellar peduncle and inferior lateral posterior cer-

ebellar cortex.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

A

Head

rotation

<!-- image -->

Figure 37–13 Cerebellar learning in the vestibulo-ocular

reflex and in saccadic eye movements.

A. Motor learning in the vestibulo-ocular reflex of a monkey

wearing magnifying spectacles. The columns show normal conditions before learning, the situation when the monkey first

dons the spectacles (day 0), and after complete adaptation (day 3). Eye movements are normally equal and opposite to head turns, and the banana stays stable in the retina during head turns. With the spectacles on, the banana appears larger; when the head turns, the vestibulo-ocular reflex is too small and the banana's image slips across the retina. After adaptation, the eye movements are large enough that the image of the banana

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 927

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum

Wearing magnifying spectacles Day 3


again remains stable on the retina during head turns. (Adapted,

with permission, from Lisberger 1988.)

B. Motor learning in saccadic eye movements. The columns

show saccades under normal conditions, on the first adaptation trial, and after full adaptation. Normally, the saccade responds

to a change in target position by bringing the eye almost perfectly to the new target position. During adaptation, the target moves to a new position during the initial saccade, requiring a second saccade to bring the eye to the new, final target position. After adaptation, the original target position evokes a larger saccade that is appropriate to bring the eye to the new target position, even though the target does not move.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

Normal Day 0



Part V / Movement

is very similar for smooth-pursuit eye movements,

except that the relevant part of the cerebellum is the

floccular complex, using the same Purkinje cells that

participate in adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex. Finally, learning of new walking patterns has been studied in cerebellar patients using a split-belt treadmill that requires one leg to move faster than the

other. Cerebellar damage does not impair the ability to use feedback to immediately change the walking pattern when the two belt speeds differ: Patients can lengthen the time that they stand on the slower treadmill belt and shorten the time that they stand on the faster treadmill belt. However, cerebellar patients cannot learn over hundreds of steps to make their walking pattern symmetric, whereas healthy individuals can (see Figure 30–14). Learning Occurs at Several Sites in the Cerebellum

We know now that there are many sites of synaptic and

## cellular plasticity in the cerebellar microcircuit. Almost every synapse that has been studied undergoes either

potentiation or depression, and the theory of cerebellar learning has been broadened accordingly. Detailed analyses of the role of cerebellar circuits in motor learning have been conducted in several motor systems: adaptation of multiple kinds of eye movements, classical conditioning of the eye blink, and motor learning in arm movements. In today's broadened theory of cerebellar learning, learning occurs not only in the cerebellar cortex, as postulated by Marr, Albus, and Ito, but also in the Inhibitory interneuron Climbing ber Inferior olive Air puff nuclei.  The diagram is based on classical conditioning of blink-

<!-- image -->

deep cerebellar nuclei (Figure 37–14). Our understanding of learning in the cerebellar cortex is based partly on long-term depression of the synapses from parallel fibers to Purkinje cells, but many other synapses are characterized by plasticity, and they also probably participate. Available evidence is still compatible with the long-standing idea that inputs from climbing fibers provide the primary instructive signals that lead to changes in synaptic strength within the cerebellar cortex, but now there is room for the possibility of other instructive signals as well. Learning probably results from coordinated synaptic plasticity at multiple sites rather than from changes at a single site. Studies of classical conditioning of the eye blink and adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex provide strong evidence that learning occurs in both the cer- special role in learning timing.

ing, which is driven by pairing a tone (so-called conditioned

stimulus carried by mossy fibers) and an air puff (the unconditioned stimulus carried by climbing fibers). Learning occurs at the parallel fiber–Purkinje cell synapses when the climbing fiber and parallel fibers are active together. Learning also occurs at the mossy-fiber synapse onto the deep cerebellar nuclei. (Sites of learning are denoted by asterisks.) While this example diagrams a classical conditioning paradigm, plasticity occurs at the same sites during adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex when head turns are associated with image motion on the retina (Chapter 27). (Adapted, with permission, from Carey and Lisberger 2002.) blink conditioning, the cerebellar cortex may play a

As discussed earlier, the cerebellum makes use of

internal models to ensure smooth and accurate move -ment in advance of any guidance by sensory feedback.

-Synaptic changes that lead to circuit learning could be the mechanisms that create and maintain accurate internal models. One important function of learning in the cerebellum may be the continuous tuning of

11/12/20 12:18 PM

ebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei. Further, considerable evidence suggests that learning may occur first in the cerebellar cortex and then be trans ferred to the deep cerebellar nuclei. At least for eye

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 928

Parallel ber

*

*
Part V / Movement

is very similar for smooth-pursuit eye movements,

except that the relevant part of the cerebellum is the

floccular complex, using the same Purkinje cells that

participate in adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex. Finally, learning of new walking patterns has been studied in cerebellar patients using a split-belt treadmill that requires one leg to move faster than the

other. Cerebellar damage does not impair the ability to use feedback to immediately change the walking pattern when the two belt speeds differ: Patients can lengthen the time that they stand on the slower treadmill belt and shorten the time that they stand on the faster treadmill belt. However, cerebellar patients cannot learn over hundreds of steps to make their walking pattern symmetric, whereas healthy individuals can (see Figure 30–14). Learning Occurs at Several Sites in the Cerebellum

We know now that there are many sites of synaptic and

## cellular plasticity in the cerebellar microcircuit. Almost every synapse that has been studied undergoes either

potentiation or depression, and the theory of cerebellar learning has been broadened accordingly. Detailed analyses of the role of cerebellar circuits in motor learning have been conducted in several motor systems: adaptation of multiple kinds of eye movements, classical conditioning of the eye blink, and motor learning in arm movements. In today's broadened theory of cerebellar learning, learning occurs not only in the cerebellar cortex, as postulated by Marr, Albus, and Ito, but also in the Inhibitory interneuron Climbing ber Inferior olive Air puff nuclei.  The diagram is based on classical conditioning of blink-

<!-- image -->

deep cerebellar nuclei (Figure 37–14). Our understanding of learning in the cerebellar cortex is based partly on long-term depression of the synapses from parallel fibers to Purkinje cells, but many other synapses are characterized by plasticity, and they also probably participate. Available evidence is still compatible with the long-standing idea that inputs from climbing fibers provide the primary instructive signals that lead to changes in synaptic strength within the cerebellar cortex, but now there is room for the possibility of other instructive signals as well. Learning probably results from coordinated synaptic plasticity at multiple sites rather than from changes at a single site. Studies of classical conditioning of the eye blink and adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex provide strong evidence that learning occurs in both the cer- special role in learning timing.

ing, which is driven by pairing a tone (so-called conditioned

stimulus carried by mossy fibers) and an air puff (the unconditioned stimulus carried by climbing fibers). Learning occurs at the parallel fiber–Purkinje cell synapses when the climbing fiber and parallel fibers are active together. Learning also occurs at the mossy-fiber synapse onto the deep cerebellar nuclei. (Sites of learning are denoted by asterisks.) While this example diagrams a classical conditioning paradigm, plasticity occurs at the same sites during adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex when head turns are associated with image motion on the retina (Chapter 27). (Adapted, with permission, from Carey and Lisberger 2002.) blink conditioning, the cerebellar cortex may play a

As discussed earlier, the cerebellum makes use of

internal models to ensure smooth and accurate move -ment in advance of any guidance by sensory feedback.

-Synaptic changes that lead to circuit learning could be the mechanisms that create and maintain accurate internal models. One important function of learning in the cerebellum may be the continuous tuning of

11/12/20 12:18 PM

ebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei. Further, considerable evidence suggests that learning may occur first in the cerebellar cortex and then be trans ferred to the deep cerebellar nuclei. At least for eye

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 928

Parallel ber

*

*

internal models. Cerebellar internal models may use

sensory feedback to adjust synaptic and cellular func-

tion so that motor commands produce movements that

are rapid, accurate, and smooth. Thus, the cerebellum appears to be the learning machine envisioned by the earliest investigators, but its learning capabilities may be greater and more widely dispersed than originally imagined and may affect all cerebellar contributions to behavior. Highlights

1. The cerebellum plays a critical role in movement.

Damage to the cerebellum leads to profound

movement incoordination called ataxia, which

- affects all movements ranging from eye and limb movements to balance and walking. Cerebellar damage also leads to some sensory deficits but only during active movement. 2. The cerebellum also plays a role in cognitive and emotional behavior. Deficits in these domains are less immediately obvious after cerebellar damage
- but appear with formalized testing. There is probably a common mechanism for deficits across both motor and nonmotor domains, but the mechanism is not yet understood. 3. The cerebellum acts through its connections to other brain structures. Its inputs come indirectly from wide regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as
- from the brainstem and spinal cord. Cerebellar outputs project to the vestibular nuclei, the brainstem reticular formation, and the red nucleus and via the thalamus to wide regions of the cerebral cortex. 4. Reciprocal connections between the cerebellum and the cerebral cortex include sensory and motor cortices as well as wide regions of the parietal and
- prefrontal cortices. Cerebrocerebellar connections are organized as a series of parallel, closed, recurrent loops, where a given region of the cerebral cortex makes both efferent and afferent connec -tions with a given part of the cerebellum. 5. The circuit of the cerebellar cortex is highly stereotyped, suggesting a common computational mechanism for its interactions with other brain
- regions. It includes an input granular layer where mossy fibers synapse on granule cells and Golgi cells provide inhibitory feedback; an inhibitory Purkinje cell layer, with the sole output neurons of the cerebellar cortex; and a molecular layer where Purkinje cell dendrites and inhibitory interneurons receive inputs from the parallel fibers that emerge from the axons of granule cells.

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 929

Selected Reading

Bodranghien F, Bastian A, Casali C, et al. 2016. Consensus

paper: revisiting the symptoms and signs of cerebellar

## syndrome. Cerebellum 15:369–391.

Bostan AC, Dum RP, Strick PL. 2013. Cerebellar networks with the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia. Trends Cogn Sci 17:241–254.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


6. The climbing-fiber and mossy-fiber inputs to the

cerebellum are very different anatomically. Each

Purkinje cell receives many synaptic contacts from

- a single climbing fiber but can be influenced via granule cells by a huge number of mossy fibers. Climbing fibers fire at very low frequencies and cause unitary "complex spikes" in Purkinje cells. Mossy fibers cause "simple spikes" that can discharge at very high rates. It is thought that the interplay between these inputs is essential for learning. 7. Theories of cerebellar motor control emphasize several general principles. The cerebellum is important for generating reliable feedforward

-

- action before there has been time for useful sen -sory feedback to occur. It plays a key role in the internal control of timing. The cerebellum relies on computations that combine sensory inputs with corollary discharge reporting the movement that was commanded. Internal models of the motor effector organs and the world allow the cerebellum to estimate the state of the motor system and guide accurate feedforward actions. 8. Learning and adaptation of movement are fundamental functions of the cerebellum. Cerebel lar learning requires feedback about movement
- errors and updates movement on a trial-by-trial basis. There are many sites of synaptic plasticity in the cerebellum, and current evidence for motor learning systems supports at least two sites of learning in the cerebellum. One site involves longterm depression of the synapses from parallel fibers to Purkinje cells, guided by errors signaled by climbing-fiber inputs. The other site is in the deep cerebellar nuclei. It is likely that the same learning mechanism is used for cognitive and emotional processing.

Amy J. Bastian

Stephen G. Lisberger


Part V / Movement

Boyden ES, Katoh A, Raymond JL. 2004. Cerebellum-dependent

learning: the role of multiple plasticity mechanisms. Annu

Rev Neurosci 27:581–609.

- Ito M. 1984. The Cerebellum and Neural Control. New York: Raven. Raymond JL, Lisberger SG, Mauk MD. 1996. The cerebellum:
- a neuronal learning machine? Science 272:1126–1131. Stoodley CJ, Schmahmann JD. 2010. Evidence for topographic
- organization in the cerebellum of motor control versus cognitive and affective processing. Cortex 46:831–844.
- References

Adamaszek M, D'Agata F, Ferrucci R, et al. 2017. Consensus

paper: cerebellum and emotion. Cerebellum 16:552–576.

Adrian ED. 1943. Afferent areas in the cerebellum connected

- with the limbs. Brain 66:289–315. Albus JS. 1971. A theory of cerebellar function. Math Biosci
- 10:25–61. Arshavsky YI, Berkenblit MB, Fukson OI, Gelfand IM,
- Orlovsky GN. 1972. Recordings of neurones of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract during evoked locomotion. Brain
- Res 43:272–275. Arshavsky YI, Berkenblit MB, Fukson OI, Gelfand IM, Orlovsky GN. 1972. Origin of modulation in neurones of the ventral spinocerebellar tract during locomotion. Brain
- Res 43:276–279. Bastian AJ, Martin TA, Keating JG, Thach WT. 1996. Cerebellar ataxia: abnormal control of interaction torques across multiple joints. J Neurophysiol 176:492–509.
- Bastian AJ, Zackowski KM, Thach WT. 2000. Cerebellar ataxia: torque deficiency or torque mismatch between joints? J Neurophys 83:3019–3030.
- Bhanpuri NH, Okamura AM, Bastian AJ. 2013. Predictive modeling by the cerebellum improves proprioception. J Neurosci 33:14301–14306.

Flament D, Hore J. 1986. Movement and electromyographic

disorders associated with cerebellar dysmetria. J Neuro-

physiol 55:1221–1233.

- Gao Z, van Beugen BJ, De Zeeuw CI. 2012. Distributed synergistic plasticity and cerebellar learning. Nat Rev Neurosci 13:619–635.
- Ghasia FF, Meng H, Angelaki DE. 2008. Neural correlates of forward and inverse models for eye movements: evidence from three-dimensional kinematics. J Neurosci 28:5082–5087.
- Gilbert PFC, Thach WT. 1977. Purkinje cell activity during motor learning. Brain Res 128:309–328. Groenewegen HJ, Voogd J. 1977. The parasagittal zonation
- within the olivocerebellar projection. I. Climbing fiber distribution in the vermis of cat cerebellum. J Comp Neurol
- 174:417–488. Heck DH, Thach WT, Keating JG. 2007. On-beam synchrony in the cerebellum as the mechanism for the timing and coordination of movement. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

-

- 104:7658–7663. Hore J, Flament D. 1986. Evidence that a disordered servolike mechanism contributes to tremor in movements dur ing cerebellar dysfunction. J Neurophysiol 56:123–136.
- Ito M, Sakurai M, Tongroach P. 1982. Climbing fibre induced depression of both mossy fibre responsiveness and glutamate sensitivity of cerebellar Purkinje cells. J Physiol
- Lond 324:113–134. Ivry RB, Keele SW. 1989. Timing functions of the cerebellum. J Cogn Neurosci 1:136–152. Jansen J, Brodal A (eds). 1954. Aspects of Cerebellar Anatomy .
- Oslo: Grundt Tanum. Kelly RM, Strick PL. 2003. Cerebellar loops with motor cortex
- and prefrontal cortex of a nonhuman primate. J Neurosci 23:8432–8444.
- Kim SG, Ugurbil K, Strick PL. 1994. Activation of a cerebellar output nucleus during cognitive processing. Science 265:949–951.
- , Larsell O, Jansen J. 1972. The Comparative Anatomy and Histology of the Cerebellum: The Human Cerebellum, Cerebellar Connection and Cerebellar Cortex, pp. 111–119. Minneapolis,
- Brooks VB, Thach WT. 1981. Cerebellar control of posture and movement. In Handbook of Physiology, The Nervous System Sect. I, Vol. 2, ed. V. B. Brooks, pp. 877–46. Bethesda: Am
- Physiol Soc. Brooks JX, Carriot J, Cullen KE. 2015. Learning to expect the unexpected: rapid updating in primate cerebellum during voluntary self-motion. Nat Neurosci 18:1310–1317.
- MN: Univ. of Minnesota Press. Lisberger SG. 1988. The neural basis for motor learning in the vestibulo-ocular reflex in monkeys. Trends in Neurosci 11:147–152.
- Buckner RL, Krienen FM, Castellanos A, Diaz JC, Yeo BT. 2011 The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol
- 106:2322–2345. Courchesne E, Yeung-Courchesne R, Press GA, Hesselink JR, Jernigan TL. 1988. Hypoplasia of cerebellar vermal lobules VI and VII in autism. N Engl J Med 318:1349–1354.
- Carey MR, Lisberger SG. 2002. Embarrassed but not depressed: some eye opening lessons for cerebellar learning. Neuron 35: 223–226.
- Eccles JC, Ito M, Szentagothai J. 1967. The Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine. New York: Springer. Fiez JA, Petersen SE, Cheney MK, Raichle ME. 1992. Impaired
- non-motor learning and error detection associated with cerebellar damage. Brain 115:155–178.

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 930

- Lisberger SG. 1994. Neural basis for motor learning in the vestibulo-ocular reflex of primates. III. Computational and behavioral analysis of the sites of learning. J Neurophysiol
- 72:974–998. Lisberger SG, Fuchs AF. 1978. Role of primate flocculus during rapid behavioral modification of vestibulo-ocular reflex. I. Purkinje cell activity during visually guided hori-
- zontal smooth-pursuit eye movements and passive head rotation. J Neurophysiol 41:733–763. Marr D. 1969. A theory of cerebellar cortex. J Physiol 202:437–470. Martin TA, Keating JG, Goodkin HP, Bastian AJ, Thach
- WT. 1996. Throwing while looking through prisms. I. Focal olivocerebellar lesions impair adaptation. Brain
- 119:1183–1198.

11/12/20 12:18 PM

Martinez FE, Crill WE, Kennedy TT. 1971. Electrogenesis of

cerebellar Purkinje cell responses in cats. J Neurophysiol

34:348–356.

- McCormick DA, Thompson RF. 1984. Cerebellum: essential involvement in the classically conditioned eyelid response. Science 223:296–299.
- Medina JF, Lisberger SG. 2008. Links from complex spikes to local plasticity and motor learning in the cerebellum of awake-behaving monkeys. Nat Neurosci 11:1185–1192.
- Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. 1981. The human central nervous system: a synopsis and atlas. Springer. Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen Chr. 1988. The Human
- Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd rev. ed. Berlin: Springer.
- Ohyama T, Nores WL, Medina JF, Riusech FA, Mauk MD. 2006. Learning-induced plasticity in deep cerebellar nucleus. J Neurosci 26:12656–12663.
- Pasalar S, Roitman AV, Durfee WK, Ebner TJ. 2006. Force field effects on cerebellar Purkinje cell discharge

Kandel-Ch37\_0908-0931.indd 931

Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum


with implications for internal models. Nat Neurosci

9:1404–1411.

Robinson DA. 1976. Adaptive gain control of vestibuloocular

- reflex by the cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 39:954–969. Strata P, Montarolo PG. 1982. Functional aspects of the infe-
- rior olive. Arch Ital Biol 120:321–329. Strick PL, Dum RP, Fiez JA. 2009. Cerebellum and nonmotor
- function. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:413–434. Thach WT. 1968. Discharge of Purkinje and cerebellar nuclear
- neurons during rapidly alternating arm movements in the monkey. J Neurophysiol 31:785–797.
- Tseng YW, Diedrichsen J, Krakauer JW, Shadmehr R, Bastian AJ. 2007. Sensory prediction errors drive cerebellum-dependent adaptation of reaching. J Neuro-
- physiol 98:54–62. Yeo CH, Hardiman MJ, Glickstein M. 1984. Discrete lesions of the cerebellar cortex abolish the classically conditioned nictitating membrane response of the rabbit. Behav Brain
- Res 13:261–266.

11/12/20 12:18 PM


The Basal Ganglia

The Basal Ganglia Network Consists of Three Principal Input

Nuclei, Two Main Output Nuclei, and One Intrinsic Nucleus

The Striatum, Subthalamic Nucleus, and Substantia

## Nigra Pars Compacta/Ventral Tegmental Area Are the Three Principal Input Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia

The Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata and the Internal Globus Pallidus Are the Two Principal Output Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia

The External Globus Pallidus Is Mostly an Intrinsic Structure of the Basal Ganglia The Internal Circuitry of the Basal Ganglia Regulates How

the Components Interact The Traditional Model of the Basal Ganglia Emphasizes

## Direct and Indirect Pathways Detailed Anatomical Analyses Reveal a More

Complex Organization Basal Ganglia Connections With External Structures Are

Characterized by Reentrant Loops Inputs Define Functional Territories in the

## Basal Ganglia Output Neurons Project to the External Structures That

Provide Input Reentrant Loops Are a Cardinal Principle of Basal

Ganglia Circuitry Physiological Signals Provide Further Clues to Function in

the Basal Ganglia The Striatum and Subthalamic Nucleus Receive Signals

## Mainly from the Cerebral Cortex, Thalamus, and Ventral Midbrain

Ventral Midbrain Dopamine Neurons Receive Input From External Structures and Other Basal Ganglia Nuclei Disinhibition Is the Final Expression of

Basal Ganglia Output

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 932

Throughout Vertebrate Evolution, the Basal Ganglia Have

Been Highly Conserved

Action Selection Is a Recurring Theme in

## Basal Ganglia Research All Vertebrates Face the Challenge of Choosing One

## Behavior From Several Competing Options Selection Is Required for Motivational, Affective,

Cognitive, and Sensorimotor Processing The Neural Architecture of the Basal Ganglia Is

Configured to Make Selections Intrinsic Mechanisms in the Basal Ganglia

Promote Selection Selection Function of The Basal Ganglia

Questioned Reinforcement Learning Is an Inherent Property of a

Selection Architecture Intrinsic Reinforcement Is Mediated by Phasic Dopamine

## Signaling Within the Basal Ganglia Nuclei Extrinsic Reinforcement Could Bias Selection by

Operating in Afferent Structures Behavioral Selection in the Basal Ganglia Is Under

Goal-Directed and Habitual Control Diseases of the Basal Ganglia May Involve Disorders of

## Selection A Selection Mechanism Is Likely to Be Vulnerable to

## Several Potential Malfunctions Parkinson Disease Can Be Viewed in Part as a Failure to

Select Sensorimotor Options Huntington Disease May Reflect a Functional Imbalance

Between the Direct and Indirect Pathways Schizophrenia May Be Associated With a General Failure

to Suppress Nonselected Options

09/12/20 5:14 PM

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Tourette

Syndrome May Also Be Characterized by Intrusions of

Nonselected Options

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Reflects the Presence of Pathologically Dominant Options Addictions Are Associated With Disorders of

Reinforcement Mechanisms and Habitual Goals Highlights

T

Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


why diseases of the basal ganglia are frequently associ-

ated with complex cognitive, motivational, and affec-

tive dysfunction in addition to the better-known motor

disturbances. This chapter provides a perspective on the fundamental contributions of the basal ganglia (Figure 38–1) to overall brain function. Recent advances in the fields

he traditional view that the basal

play a role in movement arises primarily because

diseases of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson

and Huntington disease, are associated with prominent disturbances of movement, and from the belief that basal ganglia neurons send their output exclusively to the motor cortex by way of the thalamus. However, we now know that the basal ganglia also project to wide areas of the brain stem and via the thalamus to non motor areas of the cerebral cortex and limbic system, thereby providing a mechanism whereby they contribute to a wide variety of cognitive, motivational, and affective operations. This understanding also explains

Caudate nucleus

Putamen

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 933

ganglia -of artificial neural networks and robotics emphasize that behavioral function is an emergent property of signal processing in physically connected networks (Chapter 5). Thus, how components of networks are connected and how their input signals are transformed into output signals impose important constraints on final behavioral outputs. We first describe the principal anatomical and physiological features of the basal ganglia network and consider the constraints these might impose on their function. We consider the extent to which the basal ganglia have been conserved during vertebrate brain evolution and, based on these insights, review evidence suggesting that the basal ganglia's normal functions are to select between incompatible behaviors and to mediate reinforcement learning. We conclude by examining important insights into how the system can malfunction in some of the major diseases involving the basal ganglia.

Basal

ganglia

coronal section of a human brain. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys,

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Part V / Movement

The Basal Ganglia Network Consists of Three

Principal Input Nuclei, Two Main Output

Nuclei, and One Intrinsic Nucleus

## The striatum (a collective term for the caudate nucleus and putamen; see Figure 38–1), subthalamic nucleus,

and substantia nigra pars compacta/ventral tegmental

area are the three major input nuclei of the basal ganglia, receiving signals directly and indirectly from structures distributed throughout the neuraxis (Figure 38–2). The Striatum, Subthalamic Nucleus, and Substantia

Nigra Pars Compacta/Ventral Tegmental Area Are the

Three Principal Input Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia

## The striatum is the largest nucleus of the basal ganglia. It receives direct input from most regions of the cerebral cortex and limbic structures, including the

amygdala and hippocampus. Important input from sensorimotor and motivational regions of the brain stem is relayed indirectly via the thalamus. In rodents, the number of contacts received in the striatum from the cerebral cortex and thalamus are approximately equivalent. Finally, important modulatory input to the striatum comes from the substantia nigra pars compacta (dopamine), midbrain raphe (serotonin), and pedunculopontine nucleus (acetylcholine). The striatum is subdivided functionally on the basis of the organization of input connections, principally the topographically organized afferents from the cerebral

Figure 38–2 The principal input, intrinsic, and cortex. Limbic, associative, and sensorimotor territories are generally recognized along a ventromedialdorsolateral continuum. This diversity of input shows that the basal ganglia receive signals from brain regions involved in different motivational, emotional, cognitive, and sensorimotor processes, implying that whatever

output connections of the mammalian basal

ganglia.  The main input nuclei are the striatum

(STR), subthalamic nucleus (STN), and substantia nigra pars compacta (not shown). They receive input directly from the thalamus, cerebral cortex, and limbic structures (amygdala and hippocampus). The main output nuclei are the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) and internal globus pallidus/ entopeduncular nucleus (not shown). The external globus pallidus (GP) is classified as an intrinsic nucleus as most of its connections are with other basal ganglia nuclei. Structures are shown on a sagittal schematic of the rodent brain. Red and dark gray arrows denote excitatory and inhibitory connections, respectively.

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 934

the basal ganglia are doing, they are doing it for a wide

range of brain processes.

An additional architectural feature of the striatum

suggests that the basal ganglia are performing more or less the same operations on their inputs from function-

ally diverse afferent structures. Specifically, within each of the striatum's functional territories, the cellular archi -tecture is remarkably similar. In all regions, inhibitory γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic medium spiny neurons are the principal cell type (&gt;90% of all neurons). In addition, in all functionally defined regions, the medium spiny neurons are separated into two populations according to the relative expression of neuroactive peptides (substance P and dynorphin versus enkephalin) or the expression of D 1 and D 2 dopamine receptors, which are thought to positively and negatively modulate cyclic adenosine monophosphate signaling in these neurons. These populations contribute differentially to different efferent projections of the striatum. In addition to these long-range inhibitory connections to other basal ganglia nuclei, medium spiny neurons also send local collaterals to adjacent cells. Colocalized GABAergic and peptidergic neurotransmission provides local mutually inhibitory and excitatory influences. The remaining 5% to 10% of neurons in the striatum are purely GABAergic and cholinergic interneurons, which can be distinguished according to neurochemical, electrophysiological, and in some cases morphological characteristics. The fact that this local cellular architecture is present in all functional regions suggests that neurons in the striatum are applying the same or similar computations on functionally diverse afferent pathways. The subthalamic nucleus has traditionally been considered an important internal relay in the "indirect output pathway" from the striatum to the basal

ganglia output nuclei (see below). It is now also recognized as a second important input nucleus of the basal

Cortex

<!-- image -->

09/12/20 5:14 PM

ganglia. Topographically organized inputs derive not

only from large parts of frontal cortex, but also from

various thalamic and brain stem structures. The sub

-

thalamic nucleus is the only component of the basal ganglia that has excitatory (glutamatergic) output connections. These project to both output nuclei and to the intrinsic external globus pallidus. The substantia nigra pars compacta/ventral tegmental area contain an important population of dopaminergic neurons. These neurons represent the third

major input station of the basal ganglia and give rise to the nigrostriatal and mesolimbic/mesocortical dopamine projections. They receive significant afferent connections from other basal ganglia nuclei (the striatum, globus pallidus, and subthalamus), but also from many structures in the brain stem (eg, superior colliculus, rostromedial tegmental region, raphe nuclei, pedunculopontine nucleus, and parabrachial area). Other afferent connections are from the frontal cortex and the amygdala. This pattern of connectivity is important because it suggests the most important direct influence over the dopaminergic neurons arises from evolutionarily ancient parts of the brain (see below). Individual dopaminergic neurons have highly branching axons that project into extensive regions of not only the other basal ganglia nuclei but also exter- Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


inputs from other basal ganglia nuclei and projects

to external targets in the thalamus and brain stem.

GABAergic input from the striatum and external

globus pallidus are inhibitory, while input from the subthalamic nucleus is glutamatergic and excitatory. Neurons of the internal globus pallidus are themselves GABAergic and have high levels of tonic activity. Under normal circumstances, this imposes powerful inhibitory effects on targets in the thalamus, lateral habenula, and brain stem. The substantia nigra pars reticulata is the second principal output nucleus. It also receives afferents from other basal ganglia nuclei and provides efferent con-

nections to the thalamus and brain stem. Inhibitory (GABAergic) inputs come from the striatum and globus pallidus (external) and excitatory input from the subthalamus. Pars reticulata neurons are also GABAergic and impose strong inhibitory control over parts of the thalamus and brain stem, including the superior colliculus, pedunculopontine nucleus, and parts of the midbrain and medullary reticular formation. The External Globus Pallidus Is Mostly an Intrinsic Structure of the Basal Ganglia

## Most connections of the globus pallidus are with other basal ganglia nuclei, including inhibitory (GABAergic) input from the striatum and excitatory (glutamatergic)

finput from the subthalamus, and the globus pallidus provides inhibitory efferent connections to all the basal ganglia's input and output nuclei. This pattern of connections suggests that that the external globus pallidus is an essential regulator of internal basal ganglia activity. Having described the core components of the basal ganglia, we will now consider in more detail how they are connected, first with each other and then with

external structures in the brain. The Internal Circuitry of the Basal Ganglia

Regulates How the Components Interact

## The Traditional Model of the Basal Ganglia Emphasizes Direct and Indirect Pathways

## An influential interpretation of the intrinsic circuitry of the basal ganglia was proposed in the late 1980s by

Roger Albin and colleagues (Figure 38–3A). In their

scheme, signals originating in the cerebral cortex are distributed to two populations of medium spiny output neurons in the striatum. Neurons containing substance P and a preponderance of D 1 dopamine receptors make direct inhibitory

09/12/20 5:14 PM

nal structures (eg, frontal cortex, septal area, amygdala, habenula). This suggests that their important modulatory signals are widely broadcast throughout targeted structures. The highest concentration of dopaminergic terminals is found in the striatum, where synaptic and nonsynaptic contacts are formed with both medium spiny cells and interneurons. The existence of nonsynaptic contacts gives rise to what has been called volume transmission. This occurs when neurotransmitters diffuse through the brain's extracellular fluid from release points that may be remote from targeted cells. Consequently, volume transmission typically has a longer time course than synaptic neurotransmission. Deployment of volume transmission in targeted structures is further evidence for the idea that the effects of dopamine in targeted structures are widely broadcast and spatially imprecise. Variable proportions of GABAergic neurons (substantia nigra and the ventral tegmental area) and glutamatergic neurons (ventral tegmental area) contribute to local processing in these structures. The Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata and the Internal Globus Pallidus Are the Two Principal

Output Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia

## The internal globus pallidus/entopeduncular nucleus is one of the two principal output nuclei. It receives

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 935


Part V / Movement

A Internal circuitry proposed by Albin et al. (1989)

Cortex Thalamus GABA

<!-- image -->

Figure 38–3 Intrinsic connections within the basal ganglia.

B Contemporary view of internal circuitry

Cortex

<!-- image -->

A. The influential proposal by Roger Albin and colleagues (1989)

is presented, where output of the basal ganglia is determined

by the balance between a direct pathway from the striatum to

the output nuclei (internal globus pallidus [Gpi] and substantial nigra pars reticulata [SNr]), which promotes behavior, and an indirect pathway from the striatum to the output nuclei via relays in the external globus pallidus (GPe) and subthalamic contact with the basal ganglia output nuclei—the direct pathway. In contrast, striatal neurons containing

enkephalin and expressing mainly D


dopamine recep- Thalamus nucleus (STN), which suppresses behavior. The balance between the direct and indirect projections was thought to be regulated by afferent dopaminergic signals from substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) acting on differentially distributed D 1 and D 2 dopamine receptors. B. More recent anatomical investigations have revealed a rather more complex organization where the transformations of basal ganglia inputs that generate outputs are less easy to predict.

contact with the output nuclei in addition to the traditional indirect connections to the subthalamus—often

with branching collaterals to all three structures; (3) the

tors make excitatory contact with the output nuclei via relays in the globus pallidus and subthalamus—the indirect pathway. Basal ganglia output was thought to reflect a cortically determined balance between these inhibitory and excitatory projections terminating on the two output structures (the internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata). In this model, a behavior would be promoted when the direct pathway was dominant and inhibited when the indirect pathway was dominant. Detailed Anatomical Analyses Reveal a More Complex Organization

## Recent anatomical observations show that the inter nal circuitry of the basal ganglia is more complex than originally envisaged (Figure 38–3B). The main findings

have been that: (1) medium spiny neurons of the direct pathway also provide collateral input to the globus pallidus; (2) globus pallidus neurons also make direct

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 936

-globus pallidus also projects back to the striatum and to structures outside the basal ganglia; (4) the subthalamic nucleus also projects back to the external globus pallidus, in addition to the feedforward connections to the two basal ganglia output nuclei; and (5) major inputs to the subthalamic nucleus originate from both cortical and subcortical structures external to the basal ganglia. Consequently, the subthalamus is now considered a major input structure of the basal ganglia (see above), rather than a simple relay in the intrinsic indirect projection. A modern appreciation of this complex organization within the basal ganglia suggests it is no longer possible to intuit how a particular input might be transformed by the basal ganglia to generate a specific output. For this reason, computational modeling of the internal circuitry of the basal ganglia has become increasingly important. Although the overall pattern of intrinsic circuitry is complex (Figure 38–3B), connections between components of the basal ganglia are topographically ordered

09/12/20 5:14 PM

throughout. Some of these projections are compara-

tively focused (eg, the striatonigral projection), while

others are more diffuse (eg, the subthalamonigral Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


contacting targets in the thalamus, midbrain, and

hindbrain. An example of the functional consequences

of this organization is that a subset of neurons in the

projection). Significant reductions in the comparative numbers of neurons in afferent structures, the stria tum, and the output nuclei suggest a dramatic compression of information as it is processed within the basal ganglia. Basal Ganglia Connections With External

Structures Are Characterized by

Reentrant Loops

-substantia nigra pars reticulata associated with oral behavior can simultaneously influence the activity in the specific regions of the thalamus/cortex, midbrain, and hindbrain that interact during the production of oral behavior. Reentrant Loops Are a Cardinal Principle of Basal Ganglia Circuitry

## Spatial topographies associated with input projections, intrinsic connections, and outputs of the

## Inputs Define Functional Territories in the Basal Ganglia

basal ganglia provided the basis for the influen-

## The functional status of inputs to the striatum from the cerebral cortex, limbic structures, and thalamus provides the rationale for classifying functional territories

within the basal ganglia nuclei (limbic, associative, and sensorimotor). However, the manner in which the afferent projections make contact with neurons of the basal ganglia nuclei suggests important functional differences. For example, axons arriving in the striatum from the cerebral cortex and central lateral thalamic nucleus appear to make few contacts with many striatal neurons. In contrast, inputs from other regions, principally the parafascicular thalamic nucleus, have axons that make many contacts with fewer individual striatal neurons. Afferent connections to the subtha lamic nucleus, at least from cerebral cortex, are also topographically organized according to the limbic, associative, and sensorimotor classification. However, there is no evidence of the same kind of precise topographical input from external structures to SNc and VTA dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain. Output Neurons Project to the External Structures That Provide Input

-tial organizational principle suggested by Garrett Alexander and colleagues in 1989. Connections between the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia can be viewed as a series of reentrant parallel projecting, partly segregated, cortico-striato-nigro-thalamo-cortical loops or channels (Figure 38–4). Thus, an important component of the projections from different functional areas of cerebral cortex (eg, limbic, associative, sensorimotor) makes exclusive contact with specific regions of the basal ganglia input nuclei. This regional separation is maintained in forward projections throughout the internal circuitry. Focused output signals from functional territories represented in the basal ganglia output nuclei are returned, via appropriate thalamic relays, to the cortical regions providing the original input signals. The concept of parallel projecting reentrant loops through the basal ganglia has been extended to their connections with sensorimotor and motivational struc

## Basal ganglia output neurons project to regions of the thalamus (the intralaminar and ventromedial nuclei)

that project back to basal ganglia input nuclei as well

as to those regions of cortex that provided the original inputs to the striatum. Similarly, outputs from the basal ganglia to the brain stem tend to target those regions that provide input to the striatum via the thalamic midline and intralaminar nuclei. Importantly, projections from the basal ganglia output nuclei to the thalamus and brain stem are also topographically ordered. Finally, many output projections of the basal ganglia are extensively collateralized, thereby simultaneously

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 937

-

tures in the brain stem, including the superior colliculus, periaqueductal gray, pedunculopontine, and parabrachial nuclei. This implies that the reentrant loop architecture through the basal ganglia must have predated the evolutionary expansion of the cerebral cortex. An important difference is that for the cortical loops the thalamic relay is on the output side of the loop, whereas for the subcortical loops, the thalamic relay is on the input side (Figure 38–5). Further work will be required to test whether projections from different brain stem structures, as they pass through the thalamic and basal ganglia relays, are functionally distinct channels. In summary, the partially segregated reentrant loop organization is one of the dominant features characterizing the connections between the basal ganglia and

external structures. This pattern of connections provides important clues as to the role played by the basal ganglia nuclei in overall brain function. However, at

09/12/20 5:14 PM
throughout. Some of these projections are compara-

tively focused (eg, the striatonigral projection), while

others are more diffuse (eg, the subthalamonigral Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


contacting targets in the thalamus, midbrain, and

hindbrain. An example of the functional consequences

of this organization is that a subset of neurons in the

projection). Significant reductions in the comparative numbers of neurons in afferent structures, the stria tum, and the output nuclei suggest a dramatic compression of information as it is processed within the basal ganglia. Basal Ganglia Connections With External

Structures Are Characterized by

Reentrant Loops

-substantia nigra pars reticulata associated with oral behavior can simultaneously influence the activity in the specific regions of the thalamus/cortex, midbrain, and hindbrain that interact during the production of oral behavior. Reentrant Loops Are a Cardinal Principle of Basal Ganglia Circuitry

## Spatial topographies associated with input projections, intrinsic connections, and outputs of the

## Inputs Define Functional Territories in the Basal Ganglia

basal ganglia provided the basis for the influen-

## The functional status of inputs to the striatum from the cerebral cortex, limbic structures, and thalamus provides the rationale for classifying functional territories

within the basal ganglia nuclei (limbic, associative, and sensorimotor). However, the manner in which the afferent projections make contact with neurons of the basal ganglia nuclei suggests important functional differences. For example, axons arriving in the striatum from the cerebral cortex and central lateral thalamic nucleus appear to make few contacts with many striatal neurons. In contrast, inputs from other regions, principally the parafascicular thalamic nucleus, have axons that make many contacts with fewer individual striatal neurons. Afferent connections to the subtha lamic nucleus, at least from cerebral cortex, are also topographically organized according to the limbic, associative, and sensorimotor classification. However, there is no evidence of the same kind of precise topographical input from external structures to SNc and VTA dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain. Output Neurons Project to the External Structures That Provide Input

-tial organizational principle suggested by Garrett Alexander and colleagues in 1989. Connections between the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia can be viewed as a series of reentrant parallel projecting, partly segregated, cortico-striato-nigro-thalamo-cortical loops or channels (Figure 38–4). Thus, an important component of the projections from different functional areas of cerebral cortex (eg, limbic, associative, sensorimotor) makes exclusive contact with specific regions of the basal ganglia input nuclei. This regional separation is maintained in forward projections throughout the internal circuitry. Focused output signals from functional territories represented in the basal ganglia output nuclei are returned, via appropriate thalamic relays, to the cortical regions providing the original input signals. The concept of parallel projecting reentrant loops through the basal ganglia has been extended to their connections with sensorimotor and motivational struc

## Basal ganglia output neurons project to regions of the thalamus (the intralaminar and ventromedial nuclei)

that project back to basal ganglia input nuclei as well

as to those regions of cortex that provided the original inputs to the striatum. Similarly, outputs from the basal ganglia to the brain stem tend to target those regions that provide input to the striatum via the thalamic midline and intralaminar nuclei. Importantly, projections from the basal ganglia output nuclei to the thalamus and brain stem are also topographically ordered. Finally, many output projections of the basal ganglia are extensively collateralized, thereby simultaneously

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 937

-

tures in the brain stem, including the superior colliculus, periaqueductal gray, pedunculopontine, and parabrachial nuclei. This implies that the reentrant loop architecture through the basal ganglia must have predated the evolutionary expansion of the cerebral cortex. An important difference is that for the cortical loops the thalamic relay is on the output side of the loop, whereas for the subcortical loops, the thalamic relay is on the input side (Figure 38–5). Further work will be required to test whether projections from different brain stem structures, as they pass through the thalamic and basal ganglia relays, are functionally distinct channels. In summary, the partially segregated reentrant loop organization is one of the dominant features characterizing the connections between the basal ganglia and

external structures. This pattern of connections provides important clues as to the role played by the basal ganglia nuclei in overall brain function. However, at

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Part V / Movement


Limbic Associative Sensory Motor

Figure 38–4 Connections between the basal ganglia and

cerebral cortex.

<!-- image -->

A. The connections between the cerebral cortex and basal

ganglia can be viewed as a series of parallel projecting, largely segregated loops or channels. Functional territories repre-

sented at the level of cerebral cortex are maintained throughout the basal ganglia nuclei and thalamic relays. However, for each loop, the relay points in the cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus

A Cortical loops

Sensory Motor

input output Thalamus

Figure 38–5 Cortical and subcortical sensorimotor loops

through the basal ganglia.

A. For cortical loops, the position of the thalamic relay is

on the return arm of the loop. B. In the case of all subcortical loops, the position of the

<!-- image -->

thalamic relay is on the input side of the loop. Red indicates

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 938

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Mo

Mot ex

ex

<!-- image -->

ex

r co

cort

offer opportunities for activity inside the loop to be modified by

signals from outside the loop. Red and dark gray arrows rep-

ortex

<!-- image -->

resent excitatory and inhibitory connections, respectively.

B. Spatially segregated rostral-caudal gradient of human frontal cortical connectivity in caudate, putamen, and pallidum. The color-coded ring denotes regions of cerebral cortex in the sagit-

tal plane. (Reproduced, with permission, from Draganski et al. 2008. Copyright © 2008 Society for Neuroscience.)

B Subcortical loops

Sensory

input Dorsolateral Subcortical structures Motor output SN/GPi

<!-- image -->

predominantly excitatory regions and connections, while

dark gray indicates inhibitory regions and connections.

(Abbreviations: SN/GPi, substantia nigra/globus pallidus;

Thal, thalamus.)

orte

09/12/20 5:14 PM

this point, it is important not to think of the reentrant

loop architecture as comprising a series of independ-

ent and isolated functional channels. At each node

or relay point in the loop (eg, in the cortex, the input nuclei, the output nuclei, and the thalamus), there is the opportunity for information flow within the loop to be modified by information from outside the loop (see the section on reinforcement learning below). At the beginning of this chapter, we stated that behavior is an emergent property of signal processing within a neural network. Having specified the systems-

level network of the basal ganglia, we now consider the signals that are being processed within this system. Physiological Signals Provide Further Clues

to Function in the Basal Ganglia

## The Striatum and Subthalamic Nucleus Receive Signals Mainly from the Cerebral Cortex,

Thalamus, and Ventral Midbrain

## Signals received by the striatum from the cerebral cortex and thalamus are conveyed by excitatory glu-

tamatergic neurotransmission. These fast, phasically

active excitatory inputs are mediated predominantly by α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and kainate receptors when the medium spiny neurons are near resting potential; N-methyld -aspartate (NMDA) receptors play a greater role when the neurons are depolarized. Glutamatergic inputs from both cerebral cortex and thalamus also impinge on striatal interneurons. It is important to appreciate that these signals come from external structures that are simultaneously generating a wide range of behavioral options. Since

these options could not all be expressed at the same time, these inputs to the basal ganglia are thought to be in competition with each other. Another important signal to the striatum is an efference copy of the output activity from the external structures that generate behavioral responses. For example, the sensorimotor territories of the dorsolateral striatum receive collat eral fibers from motor cortex axons that send signals to the spinal cord. The effects of dopaminergic inputs from the ventral midbrain on striatal neuronal activity are complicated, with many conflicting results. In part, this Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


the striatum in a temporally controlled manner. Con-

sequently, current evidence suggests dopamine can

increase signal-to-noise ratios in the striatum, enhanc-

ing the effects of strong external inputs while suppressing weak ones. There is further evidence that dopamine can increase the excitability of medium spiny neurons in the direct pathways while at the same time decreasing the excitability of those in the indirect pathway. Finally, dopamine input is necessary for both longterm potentiation and long-term depression of glutamatergic inputs to striatal medium spiny neurons from

both cortex and thalamus. This latter point is of great significance for the role played by the basal ganglia in reinforcement learning (see below). Dopamine can also influence the activity of GABAergic and cholinergic interneurons. Although anatomically significant, much less is known about the role(s) of serotoninergic inputs to the basal ganglia. The main external sources of input to the striatum also provide parallel inputs to the subthalamic nucleus. The subthalamus therefore receives phasic excitatory

(glutamatergic) signals from the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and brain stem. Following cortical activation, short-latency excitatory effects in the subthalamus are thought to be mediated via these "hyperdirect" connections, whereas longer-latency suppressive effects are more likely to come from indirect inhibitory inputs from other basal ganglia nuclei, principally the external globus pallidus. The subthalamus receives shortlatency excitatory sensory input from the brain stem (eg, the superior colliculus); it is also influenced by dopaminergic, serotonergic, and cholinergic modulatory inputs. Ventral Midbrain Dopamine Neurons Receive Input From External Structures and Other

Basal Ganglia Nuclei

## Afferent signals to the dopaminergic neurons in the ventral midbrain come from a wide variety of autonomic, sensory, and motor areas and operate over

-a range of time scales. For example, laterally located neurons in the substantia nigra receive short-latency excitatory inputs from cortical and subcortical sensorimotor regions, while more medially positioned neurons receive both short-latency sensory signals and autonomic-related inputs from the hypothalamus over longer time scales. Important inhibitory control over dopaminergic neurons is exercised by GABAergic neurons, both local and distant from areas like the rostromedial tegmen-

tum. However, the densest inputs to the dopaminergic neurons are inhibitory inputs from the striatum and

09/12/20 5:14 PM

is due to the problem of evoking normal patterns of input activity in slice and anaesthetized preparations. However, recent developments in optogenetic technology in alert, active animals have enabled investigators both to record and manipulate dopamine signals to

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 939


Part V / Movement

globus pallidus and excitatory signals from the sub-

thalamic nucleus. The midbrain raphe nuclei provide

important modulatory serotonergic input, while both

the pedunculopontine nucleus and lateral dorsal tegmental nucleus provide cholinergic and glutamatergic inputs. An important functional question concerning the wide range of afferent signals to dopaminergic neurons is whether dopamine performs a highly integrative role or performs an essential function that is accessed by numerous different systems at different times. Disinhibition Is the Final Expression of Basal Ganglia Output

## The basal ganglia exercise influence over external structures by the fundamental processes of inhibition and disinhibition (Figure 38–6). GABAergic neurons

in the basal ganglia output nuclei typically have high tonic firing rates (40–80 Hz). This activity ensures that target regions of the thalamus and brain stem are maintained under a tight and constant inhibitory control. Focused excitatory inputs from external structures to the striatum can impose focused suppression (mediated via direct pathway GABAergic inhibitory con-

nections) on subpopulations of output nuclei neurons. This focused reduction of inhibitory output effectively releases or disinhibits targeted regions in the thalamus (eg, ventromedial nucleus) and brain stem (eg, superior colliculus) from normal inhibitory control. This sudden release from tonic inhibition allows activity in the targeted region to influence behavioral output, which in the case of the midbrain superior colliculus is to elicit saccadic eye movements. The patterns of signaling within the basal ganglia architecture provide important insights into what the overall functional properties of these networks might

be (see below). Further constraints on the likely core functions of the basal ganglia also become apparent when considering the evolutionary history of the vertebrate brain. Throughout Vertebrate Evolution, the Basal

Ganglia Have Been Highly Conserved

## Detailed comparisons between the mammalian basal ganglia and those found in phylogenetically ancient

vertebrates (eg, the lamprey) have found striking simi-

larities in their individual components, internal organization, inputs from external structures (the cortex/ pallium and thalamus), and the efferent projections of their output nuclei. For example, both direct and

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 940

Selective disinhibition

Figure 38–6 The diagram illustrates the principle of selec-

nuclei.  Throughout the figure, the relative levels of activity

within the competing channels are represented by the thick-

<!-- image -->

ness of projections, and for clarity, the indirect pathway and the return connections of the loops via the thalamus have been omitted. One of the competing inputs to the striatum (the middle one) is more active than its competitors. Relative activities in the direct inhibitory pathways (shown here) differentially suppress activity in the different channels within the output nuclei. Because output nuclei neurons are also inhibitory and tonically active, the selected channel will be the one with the strongest inhibitory input from the striatum. Tonic inhibitory output is maintained on the nonselected channels. This selective disin -hibitory mechanism operating at the level of the output nuclei means that selection will be an emergent property of the entire reentrant network. Disinhibition of selected external targets will allow them to direct movement, while nonselected targets remain inhibited and unable to influence behavior. Red, excita -tory; gray, inhibitory. indirect pathways from striatal medium spiny neurons

have been observed in the lamprey. Similarly, tonically

active GABAergic output neurons are present in the

lamprey internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata. The neurotransmitters and membrane properties of basal ganglia neurons are also remarkably similar in evolutionarily ancient and modern species. This high degree of morphological and neurochemical conservation implies that the architecture and operation of basal ganglia circuits have been retained

for more than 500 million years. The basal ganglia are therefore an essential component of brain architecture

09/12/20 5:14 PM

that is shared by all vertebrate species. Bearing in mind

that a function emerges from specific patterns of sig-

nals being processed in specific neural networks, the

conservation of basal ganglia architecture across vertebrate species places an additional important constraint on their overall function. Whatever computational problems the basal ganglia evolved to solve in evolutionarily ancient species, the same problems are likely to have remained unchanged and to confront all vertebrate species, including humans. Thus far, we have identified features of basal ganglia morphology, connectional architecture, signal processing, and evolution that provide potential insights

as to the role of the basal ganglia in overall brain function. Thus, proposed functions must be consistent with the predominant looped architecture that connects external structures with the basal ganglia and with an internal circuitry that is shared across the limbic, associative, and sensorimotor territories of the basal ganglia nuclei, and they must be shared by all vertebrate species. With these constraints in mind, we now consider functional properties that could be supported by the basal ganglia. Action Selection Is a Recurring Theme in Basal

Ganglia Research

## Despite numerous suggestions that the basal ganglia are involved in a wide range of functions, including

perception, learning, memory, attention, many aspects

of motor function, and even analgesia and seizure suppression, evidence is accumulating that these nuclei have an underlying role in a variety of selection processes. Thus, throughout the prodigious literature on the basal ganglia there are recurring references to the involvement of these nuclei in the essential brain func -tions of action selection and reinforcement learning. In this and the next section we will evaluate the extent to which these core processes are consistent with the functional constraints identified above. All Vertebrates Face the Challenge of Choosing One Behavior From Several Competing Options

## Vertebrates are multifunctional organisms: They have to maintain energy and fluid balances, defend against harm, and engage in reproductive activities. Differ-

ent areas of the brain operate in parallel to deliver these essential functions but must share limited motor resources. Sherrington's "final common motor path" means it is impossible to talk and drink at the same time. Thus, a fundamental selection problem,

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 941

Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


continually faced by all vertebrates, is determining

which functional system should be allowed to direct

behavioral output at any point in time. This is a prob-

lem that has not changed materially over the course of 500 million years of evolutionary history. What has changed over this time are the behavioral options that have evolved in different species to implement the core functions of survival and reproduction. Consequently, there has to be a system in the vertebrate brain that can adjudicate between the motivational systems that simultaneously compete for behavioral expression. A similar selection problem also arises within vertebrate multimodal sensory systems. The visual, auditory, olfactory, and tactile systems are continually

faced with multiple external stimuli, each one of which could drive a movement incompatible with one specified by others (eg, orienting/approach, avoidance/ escape). It is therefore imperative to select a stimulus that will become the focus of attention and direct movement. The problem is which stimulus should be given access to the motor systems at any one time. Selective attention provides an effective solution to this problem, making it an essential feature of vertebrate brain function. In summary, despite great evolutionary changes in the range, power, and sophistication of the sensory, motivational, cognitive, and motor systems that com-

pete for behavioral expression in different species, the fundamental computational problems of selection have remained unaltered. And, if the basal ganglia provide a generic solution to the problems of selection, a high degree of structural and functional conservation within vertebrate brain evolution would be expected. Selection Is Required for Motivational, Affective, Cognitive, and Sensorimotor Processing

## In his Principles of Psychology (1890), William James observed, "Selection is the very keel on which our mental ship is built." In this statement, he is telling us that

the neural systems of motivation, emotion, cognition, perception, and motor performance, at some stage, need to consult a mechanism that can select between parallel processed but incompatible options (Figure 38–7). It is therefore significant that intrinsic circuits in the basal ganglia nuclei are similar across the limbic, associative, and sensorimotor territories. Such repetition within the basal ganglia circuitry suggests that the same or similar computational processes are applied to inputs from very different func-

tional origins. This duplicated circuitry would therefore be in a position to resolve competitions between high-level motivational goals in the limbic territories;

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Part V / Movement Inputs

Cortex/Limbic/Thalamus of the basal ganglia is to select between competing and incompatible behavioral options. It has now been rec- ognized that many aspects of the basal ganglia archi- Subthalamus tecture are consistent with this view (Figure 38–6). The parallel loops originating from and returning to diverse cortical and subcortical functional systems can be viewed as the basic substrate for selection. The phasic excitatory input signals from the cerebral cortex and thalamus to the different functional territories of the striatum can be seen to carry signals

1. Because cortical and some thalamic inputs make compara-

tively few contacts with individual striatal neurons, a large population of sufficiently synchronized excitatory inputs is required

<!-- image -->

- to depolarize the membrane of a medium spiny neuron to an "up" state sufficient for it to fire action potentials. This mechanism can be seen as an input filter to exclude weak or less biologically significant competitors. The internal arrows in striatal neurons denote "up" (red) and "down" (gray) states. 2. Local GABAergic and peptidergic inhibitory collaterals between striatal spiny neurons and longer-range inhibitory effects of interneurons should cause highly activated striatal

representing the behavioral options competing for expression. To ensure that all options could in principle be assessed against all others, there needs to be a "common currency." This term refers to the parameter according to which qualitatively different functional options can be compared for the purpose of selection. This parameter would be represented by the relative magnitudes of input signals to the striatum, thereby providing each competitor with a measure of relative biological importance or salience. In principle, it should be necessary only for the basal ganglia to appreciate which option is most salient in terms of the common currency. Processing within the parallel projecting internal architecture (Figure 38–6) would ensure that channels associated with the most salient input activity would

- elements to suppress activity in adjacent more weakly activated channels. 3. The combination of focused inhibition from the striatum with the more diffuse excitation from the subthalamus would both decrease the activity in selected channels and increase activity
- in nonselected channels in the basal ganglia output nuclei. The output from just one of the striatal and subthalamic neurons has been illustrated to make this point. 4. Local inhibitory collaterals between output nuclei neurons should further sharpen the difference between inhibited and noninhibited channels.
- competitions between incompatible cognitive represen-

tations in the central associative territories; and competi-

tions between incompatible sensory and motor options

resolved in the lateral sensorimotor regions. The Neural Architecture of the Basal Ganglia Is Configured to Make Selections

## At various times during the past 40 years, and more so recently, it has been argued that the principle function

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 942

cause focused inhibition at the level of the output nuclei (the winning options), while at the same time maintaining or increasing the tonic inhibitory activity in output channels returning to regions specifying weaker (losing) options. Experiments that have recorded neural activity in basal ganglia output nuclei in active animals describe populations of task-sensitive neurons whose activity is reduced or paused prior to movement (the winning option). Conversely, there is a separate, often larger population whose high level of tonic activity is further increased or at least maintained (the losing options). The returning signals within the disinhibited channel(s) are necessary to permit the structures providing the strongest motivational, cognitive, or sensorimotor inputs to access the shared motor resources. Importantly, the maintained or increased levels of inhibitory efferent signals within nonselected channels would prevent the output of nonselected target structures from distorting the selected option's input to the motor system. Thus, this model of the basal ganglia works by keeping all potential behavioral options under tight inhibitory control and selectively removing the inhibition from the option proving the most salient input. A central-selection control architecture, similar to the systems-level architecture of the basal ganglia just described, was used successfully to select actions for

09/12/20 5:14 PM

an autonomous mobile robot. Subsequently, it was con-

firmed that a biologically constrained computer simu-

lation of basal ganglia architecture could do likewise.

This work with artificial agents is important because it confirms that selection is indeed an emergent property of systems-level basal ganglia circuitry. The next question is: If the overall architecture can select, are there mechanisms within the basal ganglia that would support or facilitate this function? Intrinsic Mechanisms in the Basal Ganglia Promote Selection

## At each of the major relay points within each of the reentrant loops passing though the basal ganglia (external

structures, input nuclei, intrinsic nuclei, output nuclei,

and the thalamus), signals flowing within the parallel channels can be subjected to influences originating outside the loop. The selection model outlined above requires features within the internal circuitry of the basal ganglia that permit different channels to interact competitively with each other. Several of these can be identified (Figure 38–7). Together, these mechanisms can be viewed as a cooperative sequence of processes, each of which would facilitate the overall goal of selection. In addition, there is substantial evidence that the relative activity of direct and indirect striatal projection pathways is critical for action selection. The traditional and widely accepted view is that the relative activity in the direct and indirect pathways determines whether or not an animal will perform a particular movement. For example, recent optogenetic stimulation of direct pathway neurons leads to more movement, while optogenetic stimulation of indirect pathway neurons leads to less movement. However, an alternative view for which there is increasing evidence is that simultaneous activity in both pathways is critical for the process of selecting what to do. Here, the idea is that the direct pathway conveys signals representing the most salient options, while the indirect pathway is important for inhibiting the competing weaker options. The latter idea is consistent with the now repeated observations that both projection pathways are concurrently active during movement initiation and that specific patterns of activity in each pathway are associated with different movements. Selection Function of the Basal Ganglia Questioned

## Despite the wide appeal of the selection hypothesis of basal ganglia function, it is by no means universally

accepted. Indeed, arguments against it have been

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 943

Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


voiced based on different studies, the results of which

are considered incompatible with the selection model.

For example, it has been reported that lesions or sup-

pression of neural activity in motor territories of the internal globus pallidus failed to alter the reaction time between a sensory cue and the triggered movement. These results could indicate that the basal ganglia are mainly involved in selecting and executing actions that are self-paced, or memory-driven, rather than

cue-driven. However, a possibility not considered by these studies is that for well-practiced tasks it is likely that the sensory regions of the basal ganglia will be the most important. This is because such tasks can be performed under stimulus–response habitual control, where selection of the stimulus that triggers the response would be the critical selection. Thus, a failure to disrupt sensory cue selection in such tasks following experimental disruption of the relevant sensory region of basal ganglia would be far stronger evidence against the selection model. Another recent study claims that in some tasks action choice is already clear in cortical activity even before it reaches the basal ganglia and that the basal

ganglia activity is mainly related to reinforcing the commitment to perform the action. This study, and many others like it, base their claims on recordings from afferent structures showing that the neurons are coding the selected stimulus/action/motor program prior to relevant neural responses recorded from within the basal ganglia. An alternative interpretation of these data would be that recordings from all afferent structures that provide competing inputs to the basal ganglia will have shorter latencies than related signals recorded from within the basal ganglia. If in these experiments afferent recordings were from the structure proving the most salient of the competing inputs, then it will be coding for the ultimately selected option before it has been selected by basal ganglia. Other findings are that recordings in the basal ganglia correlate with metrics of movement (eg, speed) and that dopamine signals in the striatum can affect

the probability and also the vigor of movement. It is sometimes argued that these results are more indicative of the basal ganglia helping to commit to movement and determining the parameters of movement rather than simply selecting what to do. At least two alternative views could explain why recorded activity in the basal ganglia correlates with movement metrics. First, as mentioned above, one of the significant inputs to the striatum is an efference copy of signals relayed to the motor plant. It would be strange if these signals did not contain information about movement metrics. Second, at this point, it is probably wise to recognize

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Part V / Movement

that actions are multidimensional and, as they are

learned, require selections about not only what to do

but also where to do it, when to do it, and how to do it.

The fact that correlates of these various properties of action can be recorded within the basal ganglia nuclei should not necessarily be surprising. Recent

studies suggest that what and where options may arrive to the basal ganglia via glutamatergic input, for example, from the cortex, while when options may be modulated by dopaminergic inputs. One of the reasons we know that actions comprise these different dimensions is that each of them can be independently manipulated by reinforcement learning. It is to that topic, which is likely to be an inherent property of a selection architecture, that we now turn. Reinforcement Learning Is an Inherent

Property of a Selection Architecture

## The basal ganglia have long been associated with fundamental processes of reinforcement learning. In his

famous Law of Effect, first published in his book Animal

Intelligence (1911), Edward Lee Thorndike proposed that "any act which in a given situation produces satisfaction becomes associated with that situation so that when the situation recurs the act is more likely than before to recur also." Using contemporary language, Thorndike is stating that in a given context an action that has been associated with reward is more likely to be selected in the future when the same or similar con texts are encountered. Stated in this way, reinforcement learning can be seen as a process for biasing action selection; consequently, it would be expected to operate by modulating teaching signal that adjusts the sensitivity of intrinsic circuitry so that responses to inputs associated with unpredicted rewards are enhanced (Figure 38–8A).

In this model, therefore, the process of reinforcement learning is intrinsic to the basal ganglia nuclei. However, as we have seen above, dopaminergic neurons have highly divergent axons that terminate in wide areas of targeted nuclei. Add to this the problem of volume transmission and the fact that dopaminergic neurons often respond together as a population to relevant events and the problem of how to reinforce only those elements associated with reward or punishment immediately becomes apparent. It is thought that this issue is addressed by invoking the concept of a decaying eligibility trace. That is, spiking activity in the population of neurons associ-

ated with an action that leads to reward is thought to alter the state specifically of those neurons, making them receptive to later widely broadcast rewardrelated reinforcement signals. There is evidence that this process operates within the basal ganglia. Thus, in most contemporary models, competing behavioral options are represented by specific neurons, the activity of which can be reinforced by phasic increases or decreases in afferent dopamine signals. Because behavioral experiments have established that unpredicted reward rather than reward per se is critical for learning, the phasic response properties of

-dopaminergic neurons have captured the imagination of both the biological and computational neuroscience communities. The powerful combination of biological experimentation and computational analyses now indicates clearly that the phasic activity of midbrain dopaminergic neurons provides a teaching signal for reinforcement learning. While recording from dopaminergic neurons in the ventral midbrain, most studies presented subjects (usually monkeys) either with rewards or neu-

tral stimuli that predicted rewards. The results of these experiments showed that the phasic dopamine responses evoked by unexpected rewards, or the onset of stimuli that predict them, had short response latencies (~100 ms from stimulus onset) and short durations (again ~100 ms). The magnitude of these responses was shown to be influenced by a range of factors including the size, reliability, and extent the reward would be delayed. Importantly, when a neutral stimulus predicted reward (as in traditional Pavlovian conditioning), the phasic dopamine response transferred from the reward to the predicting stimulus. Alternatively, if a reward was predicted but not delivered, the dopaminergic neurons paused briefly at the time the reward would have been delivered. A particularly exciting

09/12/20 5:14 PM

activity in the mechanism(s) responsible for selection. How would a reinforcer (reward or punishment) bias selection in the basal ganglia architecture described above? Theoretically, competition between the options represented in the reentrant loops could be biased by sensitizing a reward-related loop at any of its relay points (cortex, input nuclei, globus pallidus, output nuclei, and thalamus). Here, we present just two examples where there is good evidence that reward operating at different nodes within the basal ganglia's reentrant loop circuitry can bias selection (Figure 38–8). Intrinsic Reinforcement Is Mediated by Phasic Dopamine Signaling Within the Basal

Ganglia Nuclei

## The popular view of reinforcement in the basal ganglia is that action selection is biased by a dopamine

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 944

A Intrinsic reinforcement Phasic dopamine and glutamate

of the basal ganglia. (Return connections of the loops via the

thalamus have been omitted for clarity.) A. Intrinsic reinforcement (red oval) involves the selective sensitization of corticostriatal neurotransmission (indicated by the relative thickness of striatal projection neurons in different

<!-- image -->

channels). Transmission in recently active (selected) channel(s) is reinforced by the combined phasic release of dopamine and glutamate evoked by an unpredicted biologically salient sensory event (eg, reward). Nonactive channels lack the eligibility trace required for dopamine reinforcement at the synapse. finding was that these responses resembled the reward

prediction error term in a machine learning reinforce-

ment algorithm. It was therefore widely concluded

that phasic dopamine responses could be operating as the brain's teaching signal in reinforcement learning. With the advent of optogenetic methodology, it has now been established beyond reasonable doubt that phasic dopamine responses can signal both positive

and negative reward prediction errors and that these responses correspondingly increase and decrease the probability that prior behavior will be selected. It is thought that phasic dopamine acts by strengthening inputs onto direct pathway neurons in the striatum and weakening inputs onto indirect pathway neurons. Consequently, there is evidence that direct pathway activity can lead animals to do more of a certain action, while indirect pathway activity would lead animals not to do an action.

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 945

Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia

B Extrinsic reinforcement Reward Tonic dopamine

<!-- image -->

The resulting selective plasticity would cause reinforced ver-

sions of recent behavioral output to be preferentially rese-

lected, thereby establishing an association between action

and outcome.

B. Recent investigations demonstrate that an association with reward (red oval) can potentiate processing in structures providing afferent signals to the striatum. Insofar as selection by

the basal ganglia is determined in part by the relative strength of inputs to the striatum (the common currency), reward-related modulation of afferent signals would effectively bias selection to favor reward-related inputs. Again, the thickness of projections in the figure denotes relative levels of activation. However, the roles of these pathways may be

more complex than this simple dichotomy. In accord-

ance with the different action dimensions outlined

above (what, where, when, and how), activity in both the direct and indirect pathways can reinforce or discourage faster or slower movements, depending on which movements lead to reward in that context. Fur -thermore, the effects of optogenetic self-stimulation of these pathways on action reinforcement seem to be different between the associative (dorsomedial) and sensorimotor (dorsolateral) domains of the striatum. This could be consistent with different dopamine signals observed in the ventral tegmental area, which projects more medially in the striatum, compared to those in the substantia nigra pars compacta, which projects more laterally. The latter has a higher proportion of dopaminergic neurons that respond to stimulus salience and preferentially respond when the animal

09/12/20 5:14 PM



Part V / Movement

initiates self-paced movements (eg, pressing a lever for

food whenever it wants, rather than when a sensory

cue is presented).

Nonetheless, a wealth of experimental data indicates that phasic dopamine-evoked neural plasticity in the basal ganglia can bias future behavioral selections

according to the value of the predicted outcome. This conclusion is consistent with the view that the basal ganglia operate as a generic selection mechanism that can support reinforcement learning. Extrinsic Reinforcement Could Bias Selection by Operating in Afferent Structures

## A second, less widely acknowledged mechanism for biasing selection within the reentrant loop architecture is by modulation of the input salience of competing

behavioral options that previously have been associated with a reinforcer—reward or punishment (Figure 38–8B). Since the relative magnitudes of input saliences in competing channels are the common currency by which competing options are judged, reinforcementinduced boosting of a particular channel's input to a selection mechanism would increase the probability of that option being selected in the future. Evidence in the literature indicates that when a particular stimulus is associated with reward, its representation is enhanced in many of the afferent struc-

tures projecting to the basal ganglia. The origin of the reinforcement signals that modulate processing in the input structures is currently unknown. However, the pretuning of basal ganglia inputs by association with reward implies that options associated with highvalue outcomes would have a correspondingly higher probability of being selected. Continual updating of input saliences by reward and punishment would bias selections in such a way that the acquisition of reward (or avoidance of punishment) would be maximized in the long term. Finally, it is probably the reward-related tuning of afferent input to the ventral midbrain that enables dopaminergic neurons to accurately report reward prediction errors. In summary, it is likely that reinforcement learning will be an additional inherent property of a selection architecture. The synaptic relay points at various loca-

tions around the parallel reentrant loop architecture provide ample opportunity for the activity in specific loops to be modulated by reward and punishment. There is now good evidence that selection bias can be achieved by reward via a mechanism involving the widespread release of dopamine within the basal ganglia. Reinforcement selectivity is likely to be achieved via some form of eligibility mechanism. A second

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 946

possibility is that the relative salience of behavioral

options can be modulated by reward and punishment

acting directly within the structures that provide input

to the basal ganglia. Behavioral Selection in the Basal Ganglia Is

Under Goal-Directed and Habitual Control

## Over the past decades, it has become apparent that actions can be learned and then selected based on goal-

directed or habitual control. Initially, as we learn to

perform particular actions to obtain specific outcomes, these actions are goal-directed, and their performance is highly sensitive to changes in the expected value of the outcome or to changes in the contingency between the action and the outcome. With repetition and consolidation, actions can become not only more efficient but also more automatic, controlled by a stimulus– response type circuit. In the case of habits, performance becomes less sensitive to changes in the outcome value or changes in contingency between action and the outcome, but

rather is controlled by the salience of antecedent stimuli or contexts. Interestingly, shifts from goal-directed to habitual behaviors can be produced not only by extended training, but also by different schedules of reinforcement. Thus, the formation of habits is favored when rewards are delivered according to random time intervals, while goal-directed control is favored when rewards are delivered after a random number of actions. Different cortical-basal ganglia loops seem to support the learning and performance of goaldirected actions versus habits. The acquisition of

goal-directed actions appears to rely on the associative cortical-basal ganglia circuit involving the dorsomedial or associative striatum, the prelimbic cortex, the mediodorsal thalamus, the orbitofrontal cortex, and the amygdala. On the other hand, the formation of habits depends upon circuits coursing through the dorsolateral or sensorimotor striatum, infralimbic cortex, and the central amygdala. It has been shown that since these two fundamen -tal modes of behavioral control operate through different reentrant loops it has been possible to cause

shifts between them through specific manipulations within the basal ganglia. Thus, damage to or inactivation of the associative territories effectively blocks goal-directed control while leaving automatic habitual control relatively unimpaired. Conversely, disruption of the sensorimotor basal ganglia causes habitual performance to switch back to goal-directed control.

09/12/20 5:14 PM
Part V / Movement

initiates self-paced movements (eg, pressing a lever for

food whenever it wants, rather than when a sensory

cue is presented).

Nonetheless, a wealth of experimental data indicates that phasic dopamine-evoked neural plasticity in the basal ganglia can bias future behavioral selections

according to the value of the predicted outcome. This conclusion is consistent with the view that the basal ganglia operate as a generic selection mechanism that can support reinforcement learning. Extrinsic Reinforcement Could Bias Selection by Operating in Afferent Structures

## A second, less widely acknowledged mechanism for biasing selection within the reentrant loop architecture is by modulation of the input salience of competing

behavioral options that previously have been associated with a reinforcer—reward or punishment (Figure 38–8B). Since the relative magnitudes of input saliences in competing channels are the common currency by which competing options are judged, reinforcementinduced boosting of a particular channel's input to a selection mechanism would increase the probability of that option being selected in the future. Evidence in the literature indicates that when a particular stimulus is associated with reward, its representation is enhanced in many of the afferent struc-

tures projecting to the basal ganglia. The origin of the reinforcement signals that modulate processing in the input structures is currently unknown. However, the pretuning of basal ganglia inputs by association with reward implies that options associated with highvalue outcomes would have a correspondingly higher probability of being selected. Continual updating of input saliences by reward and punishment would bias selections in such a way that the acquisition of reward (or avoidance of punishment) would be maximized in the long term. Finally, it is probably the reward-related tuning of afferent input to the ventral midbrain that enables dopaminergic neurons to accurately report reward prediction errors. In summary, it is likely that reinforcement learning will be an additional inherent property of a selection architecture. The synaptic relay points at various loca-

tions around the parallel reentrant loop architecture provide ample opportunity for the activity in specific loops to be modulated by reward and punishment. There is now good evidence that selection bias can be achieved by reward via a mechanism involving the widespread release of dopamine within the basal ganglia. Reinforcement selectivity is likely to be achieved via some form of eligibility mechanism. A second

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 946

possibility is that the relative salience of behavioral

options can be modulated by reward and punishment

acting directly within the structures that provide input

to the basal ganglia. Behavioral Selection in the Basal Ganglia Is

Under Goal-Directed and Habitual Control

## Over the past decades, it has become apparent that actions can be learned and then selected based on goal-

directed or habitual control. Initially, as we learn to

perform particular actions to obtain specific outcomes, these actions are goal-directed, and their performance is highly sensitive to changes in the expected value of the outcome or to changes in the contingency between the action and the outcome. With repetition and consolidation, actions can become not only more efficient but also more automatic, controlled by a stimulus– response type circuit. In the case of habits, performance becomes less sensitive to changes in the outcome value or changes in contingency between action and the outcome, but

rather is controlled by the salience of antecedent stimuli or contexts. Interestingly, shifts from goal-directed to habitual behaviors can be produced not only by extended training, but also by different schedules of reinforcement. Thus, the formation of habits is favored when rewards are delivered according to random time intervals, while goal-directed control is favored when rewards are delivered after a random number of actions. Different cortical-basal ganglia loops seem to support the learning and performance of goaldirected actions versus habits. The acquisition of

goal-directed actions appears to rely on the associative cortical-basal ganglia circuit involving the dorsomedial or associative striatum, the prelimbic cortex, the mediodorsal thalamus, the orbitofrontal cortex, and the amygdala. On the other hand, the formation of habits depends upon circuits coursing through the dorsolateral or sensorimotor striatum, infralimbic cortex, and the central amygdala. It has been shown that since these two fundamen -tal modes of behavioral control operate through different reentrant loops it has been possible to cause

shifts between them through specific manipulations within the basal ganglia. Thus, damage to or inactivation of the associative territories effectively blocks goal-directed control while leaving automatic habitual control relatively unimpaired. Conversely, disruption of the sensorimotor basal ganglia causes habitual performance to switch back to goal-directed control.

09/12/20 5:14 PM

Finally, efficient habits, where known stimuli or

circumstances trigger a particular response, are very

helpful in everyday life such as tying one's shoelaces

or locking the front door. However, we also encounter circumstances that cause us to reevaluate our actions. Shifting between goal-directed actions and habits allows us to act flexibly in the environment, and inability to do so may underlie distorted behaviors observed in addiction and other behavioral and neurological disorders of the basal ganglia. It is to this topic that we now turn. Diseases of the Basal Ganglia May Involve

Disorders of Selection

## The focus of this chapter has been how the functional architecture of the basal ganglia and their evolution-

ary history have determined their role in overall brain

function. One of the motivations for this exercise that we all have is an intrinsic scientific interest in trying to understand something we currently do not. However, there is another important reason to better understand how the basal ganglia operate. In humans, basal ganglia dysfunction is associated with numerous debilitating conditions including Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, Tourette syndrome, schizophrenia, attention

A Normal selection B Selection failure Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


deficit disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and

many addictions. Numerous studies have attempted

to shed light on how basal ganglia dysfunction leads

to the symptoms that characterize these disorders. This effort can only be helped if we have a better understanding of what a complicated system like the basal ganglia is trying to do when it is operating normally. A Selection Mechanism Is Likely to Be Vulnerable to Several Potential Malfunctions

## Thus far, we have considered the theoretical and empirical evidence supporting the idea that the looped

circuitry of the basal ganglia acts as a generic selection

mechanism within which reinforcement learning operates to maximize reward and minimize punishment. If action selection and reinforcement learning are the normal functions of the basal ganglia, it should be possible to interpret many of the human basal ganglia– related disorders in terms of selection or reinforcement malfunctions. Normal selection requires that the selected option is disinhibited at the level of basal ganglia output, while inhibition of nonselected or losing options is

maintained or increased (Figure 38–9A). An obvious failure in such a system would be if none of the options were able to achieve sufficient disinhibition to reach a

C Soft selection D Hard selection

<!-- image -->

A. Normal selection within the basal ganglia is characterized

by a reduction in inhibition of selected channels below a pro-

## posed selection threshold (central channel) while maintaining

or increasing inhibition of nonselected channels (left and right channels). Consequently, the disinhibited target structure is able to initiate the action it controls, while the nonselected targets are maintained under inhibitory control. B. Insufficient reduction in tonic inhibition of all channels means no target structure would be sufficiently disinhibited. This circumstance could explain the akinesia in Parkinson disease.

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 947

Selection

threshold

C. A failure to adequately disinhibit the selected channel or sup-

press disinhibitory activity in competing channels would cause

current selections to be vulnerable to interruption. This disorder

rcould account for the inability to maintain a train of thought and easy distraction by nonattended events in schizophrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. D. One channel may become pathologically dominant either through abnormal disinhibition of the selected channel or excessive tonic inhibition of competing channels. This would

make the relevant option easy to select and highly resistant to interruption. Hard selections may explain obsessive-compulsive disorder and addictive behaviors.

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Part V / Movement

critical selection threshold (Figure 38–9B). However, a

further important point when thinking about selection

malfunctions is to appreciate that output inhibition play an essential role in selecting habitual actions. Per- haps, therefore, it is not surprising that many of the motor features of Parkinson disease can be interpreted

fin terms of a loss of automatic habits. While patients can do things, they are trapped in the slower, serial, and voluntary mode of goal-directed control. In the future, it will be interesting to see if subtle losses of habitual control can be detected before clinical symptoms appear, thereby acting as an early marker for the condition. Huntington Disease May Reflect a Functional Imbalance Between the Direct and

Indirect Pathways

## Huntington disease is a genetically transmitted disorder, the initial symptoms of which are subtle changes

in mood, personality, cognition, and physical skills.

The abnormal movements are characterized by jerky, random, and uncontrollable movements called chorea. The disease is associated with neuronal degeneration. Damage in the early stage is most evident in the striatal medium spiny neurons, but later spreads to other regions of the nervous system. Observations that neuronal degeneration is evident in limbic, associative, and sensorimotor territories of the striatum would explain why the disease

is characterized by disturbances of affect, cognition, and sensorimotor function. Also noteworthy is that the most vulnerable neurons are those in the striatum that project to the external globus pallidus (the indirect pathway) rather than the neurons that project directly to the basal ganglia output nuclei. At the level of the output nuclei, this disturbance would tip the balance in favor of the striatal projection responsible for disinhibition. Consequently, the symptoms of Huntington disease could reflect interference with expression of the selected affective, cognitive, and sensorimotor behaviors by competitors not being sufficiently suppressed. Schizophrenia May Be Associated With a General Failure to Suppress Nonselected Options

## Schizophrenic psychosis is a condition in which there are also disturbances of affect, cognition, and sensori-

motor function. Typical symptoms include delusions

(false beliefs not based in reality), hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that do not exist), disorganized thinking (inferred from disorganized speech), and abnormal motor behavior (unpredictable agitation, stereotypy, and failure to concentrate on the matter in hand). The disease is progressive, and in later stages, negative symptoms characterized by flattened affect, social withdrawal, absence of thought, and reduced motor behavior become evident (Chapter 60).

09/12/20 5:14 PM

and disinhibition are likely to be continuously variable rather than discrete on/off states. In that case, the difference between the disinhibited and inhibited channels would determine how "hard" or "soft" the selection is. When the difference is large (Figure 38–9D), competing options are likely to find the current selection is resistant to interruption—a larger than normal input salience would be required to cause the system to switch selections. Conversely, when the difference is small (Figure 38–9C), it would be comparatively easy for a competing option to initiate a selection switch. Support for these ideas comes from behavioral observations showing that at the beginning of task learning there is frequently easy switching between

strategies. However, as the task becomes well learned, the system becomes increasingly resistant to alternative strategies. Appreciation of the concepts of hard and soft selection could therefore play an important role when thinking about how a selection mechanism might become dysfunctional in the context of basal ganglia diseases. Parkinson Disease Can Be Viewed in Part as a Failure to Select Sensorimotor Options

## The cardinal symptoms of Parkinson disease are akinesia (difficulties in initiating movement), bradykinesia

(initiated movements are slow), and rigidity (stiffness

and resistance to passive movement). Tremor is often but not always present. The principal neurological deficit responsible for the motor symptoms of Parkinson disease is thought to be the progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurotransmission in the basal ganglia. A consequence of this loss of dopamine is increased tonic and oscillatory activity in the recordings from basal ganglia output nuclei. Since the output of the

basal ganglia is GABAergic and inhibitory, in Parkinson disease, targeted structures are receiving high and uneven levels of inhibitory input. This condition impairs the normal selective (disinhibitory) function of the basal ganglia; movements are difficult to select and, when possible, are slow to execute. Parkinson disease is, however, more nuanced than this. Over much of this progressive condition, the loss of dopaminergic transmission differentially affects the sen-

sorimotor territories of the basal ganglia, leaving the limbic and associative territories comparatively unaffected. As discussed in the section on goal-directed and habitual control, the sensorimotor territories of the basal ganglia

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 948

Understanding the neurobiological basis of schizo-

phrenia has been complicated by many inconsistent

experimental procedures, high variability in symptoms,

the side effects of medications, substance abuse, and variability in response to treatments. There is, however, a consistent link between schizophrenia and the basal ganglia insofar as a major class of antipsychotic drugs acts to suppress dopaminergic neurotransmission. In terms of simple regional density of axon terminals and postsynaptic dopamine receptors, dopaminergic transmission within the basal ganglia is likely to be influenced most profoundly by dopamine-related pharmacological therapies. Moreover, there is evidence that dopamine dysregulation in the basal ganglia is intrinsic to the pathology of schizophrenia rather than a medication side effect; predates the psychosis; and is a risk factor for the illness. The implication here is that schizophrenia is associated with a net excess of dopaminergic transmission in the basal ganglia. So how might dysregulation of this form distort the normal functions of selection and reinforcement? First, the observation that schizophrenia is character-

ized by disturbances of affect, cognition, and sensorimotor behavior again suggests that the neurobiological substrate will be present in each of the basal ganglia's functional territories. Second, a recurrent theme is that with the positive symptoms there seems to be too much of everything—intense emotional intrusions, too many ideas out of control, spontaneous sensory experiences, too many distracting stimuli, and unpredictable motor agitation. One way of unifying this confusing array of symptoms is to assume that they represent a similar basic fault playing out in different functional territories of the basal ganglia. Here, the basic fault could be a failure on the part of the mechanism responsible for suppressing the impact of competing but nonselected options. Consequently, in all functional territories, the currently selected option would be pathologically vulnerable to interruption (Figure 38–9C). Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Tourette Syndrome May Also Be Characterized by Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


the condition could reflect a malfunction in the neural

systems that generate behavioral options based on the

value of likely consequences. In this situation, options

driven by immediately desired sensory events would take precedence over competing representations of disadvantageous longer-term consequences. In the case of Tourette syndrome, converging evidence indicates that the involuntary behavioral intrusions (verbal and motor tics) are associated with aberrant

activity in the cortical–basal ganglia–thalamic loops. In animal models, similar motor tics can be evoked by blocking inhibitory neurotransmission in local areas of the sensorimotor striatum. Were the disease state also to cause a similar failure of inhibition or inappropriate excitation in parts of the striatum not engaged by the current selection, disruptive motor intrusions might be expected. Furthermore, were the locus of the excessive excitation to remain constant and the motor char -acteristics of the intrusion to be repeated, it is likely that the mechanism for establishing automatic habits would be engaged, thereby further enhancing the automatic involuntary nature of the intrusion. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Reflects the Presence of Pathologically Dominant Options

## Persons with obsessive-compulsive disorder compulsively repeat specific actions (hand washing, counting things, checking things) or have particular thoughts

repeatedly come to mind uninvited (obsessions). Studies using functional neuroimaging when the symptoms are present consistently report abnormal activation at various locations within the cortical-striatum-thalamuscortical loops. In terms of a selection mechanism dysfunction, the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder would be expected when, for whatever reason, the input salience

Intrusions of Nonselected Options

## Further examples of hyperactive conditions that have been linked to basal ganglia dysfunction may also be due to a faulty selection mechanism where the system

in each case is vulnerable to intrusions. Attention defi cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), like schizophrenia, could in part be the result of a failure in the mechanism responsible for suppressing nonselected sensory options, thereby making it difficult to maintain a focus of attention. Alternatively, the impulsive aspects of

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 949

-of relevant functional channels would be abnormally dominant, thereby making it difficult for competing options to interrupt or cause behavioral or attentional switching (hard selection). The fact that the obsessional and compulsive options are dominant behaviors that have been learned suggests that the fault responsible for obsessive-compulsive disorder may lie with the reinforcement mechanism capable of adjusting input salience. Of course, such a fault could be of genetic and/or environmental origin. Addictions Are Associated With Disorders of Reinforcement Mechanisms and Habitual Goals

## Addiction to drugs and other behaviors (eg, gambling, sex, eating) represents a dramatic dysregulation of

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Part V / Movement

motivational selections. This is caused by an exagger-

ated salience of addiction-related stimuli, binge indul-

gence, and withdrawal anxiety. When addictions are Input structures receive projections from most regions of the cerebral cortex, limbic system, and brain stem, many via relays in the thalamus.

- -Inputs to the striatum and subthalamus are topographically organized. 3. The spatial topography is maintained throughout the intrinsic basal ganglia connections, as well as in projections back to the cortex, lim-

being acquired, changes in dopaminergic and opioid peptide transmission in the basal ganglia have been reported. Insofar as these transmission systems have been linked with fundamental mechanisms of reinforce ment, it might be expected that the selective rein-

forcement of addiction-related stimuli would lead to observed increases in the ability of these stimuli to capture behavior. Alternatively, the increases in negative emotional states and stress-like responses experienced during withdrawal have been associated with reductions in dopamine function. In the limbic territories of the basal ganglia, such reductions are typically associated with negative reinforcement. A final point to note is that if addiction-associated stimuli can automatically trigger the motivation/goal to indulge (ie, an automatic stimulus–goal association),

a similar kind of mechanism may be operating in the limbic territories as is currently assigned to stimulus– response habits in the sensorimotor territories. Thus, if in the case of drug addiction the goal of drug acquisition may be correctly described as a stimulus-driven habit, the practicalities of obtaining the drug can be highly goal directed (eg, robbing a convenience store, phoning the dealer) and not at all habitual. From the above sections, it can be seen that interpreting disorders of the basal ganglia in terms of dysregulations of selection and reinforcement does not

require implausible intellectual contortions. Indeed, this could be regarded as further support for the view that the systems-level function of the basal ganglia is to operate as a generic selection mechanism. Moreover, having an overriding conceptual framework based on potential disorders of normal function has an important advantage for guiding future research. Instead of fishing in the brains of patients and animal models for clues of what might have gone wrong, one is hunting within a specified network for a malfunction that would be expected to produce the observed disorder. Highlights

1. The basal ganglia are an interconnected group

of nuclei located at the base of the forebrain and

midbrain. There are three major input structures

- (the striatum, the subthalamic nucleus, and the dopamine cells of substantia nigra) and two major output structures (the internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata).

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 950

- bic system, and brain stem structures. Thus, an essential feature of systems-level basal ganglia architecture can be viewed as a series of reen -trant loops. 4. The striatum was thought to be connected to the output nuclei via direct and indirect pathways. However, recent anatomical evidence suggests a
- more complex internal architecture. 5. Phasic excitatory input to the basal ganglia is mediated by the neurotransmitter glutamate. Tonic inhibitory output from the basal ganglia
- is mediated by the neurotransmitter GABA. The reentrant loops keep afferent structures under strong inhibitory control. For any task, the tonic inhibitory firing of some output neurons pauses, while for others, it is maintained or increased. 6. Basal ganglia architecture appeared at the outset of vertebrate evolution and has been highly conserved throughout. This suggests that the com-
- putational problems they solve are likely to be problems faced by all vertebrate species. 7. The internal microarchitecture of the intrinsic basal ganglia nuclei is largely the same throughout their motivational, affective, cognitive, and
- sensorimotor territories. This suggests that the same basal ganglia algorithm is applied to all general classes of brain function. 8. A recurring theme within the basal ganglia literature is their involvement in action selection and reinforcement learning.
9. The selection hypothesis is supported by the following: (1) Selection is a generic problem faced by all vertebrates. (2) A selection algorithm com-
- mon to all basal ganglia territories could resolve competitions between incompatible motivational, affective, cognitive, and sensorimotor options. (3) Many intrinsic processes could support a selection function. (4) Selective removal of output inhibition within a multiple reentrant looped architecture is necessarily a selection process. (5) Computational models of basal ganglia architecture effectively select the actions of multifunctional robots. 10. Abundant evidence indicates that the basal ganglia are an essential substrate for reinforcement

09/12/20 5:14 PM

2.

11.

learning where selections are biased by the

valence/value of past outcomes.

The multidimensional aspects of action (what,

- where, when, and how to do something) can be independently modified by reinforcement learn-
- ing. It will be important to determine whether these different aspects of action are learned within the same or different functional territories of the basal ganglia. 12. Recent optogenetic investigations have confirmed that phasic dopamine signaling can act as a training signal for reinforcement learning.
13. Within the reentrant looped architecture, future selections can be biased not only within the basal ganglia by dopamine but also at synapses
- in external afferent structures and the thalamic relays. 14. Reinforcement learning can bias selections on the basis of outcome value (goal-directed), or by operating on an acquired automatic stimulus–

Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia


Redgrave P, Prescott T, Gurney KN. 1999. The basal ganglia:

a vertebrate solution to the selection problem? Neurosci-

ence 89:1009–1023.

- Redgrave P, Rodriguez M, Smith Y, et al. 2010. Goal-directed and habitual control in the basal ganglia: implications for Parkinson's disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 11:760–772.
- Saunders A, Oldenburg IA, Berezovskii VK, et al. 2015. A direct GABAergic output from the basal ganglia to frontal cortex. Nature 521:85–89.
- Yin HH, Knowlton BJ. 2006. The role of the basal ganglia in habit formation. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:464–476. Yttri EA, Dudman JT. 2016. Opponent and bidirectional con-
- trol of movement velocity in the basal ganglia. Nature 533:402–406.
- References

Albin RL, Mink JW. 2006. Recent advances in Tourette syn-

drome research. Trends Neurosci 29:175–182.

Albin RL, Young AB, Penney JB. 1989. The functional anatomy

- of basal ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosci 12:366–375. Alexander GE, Crutcher MD, Delong MR. 1990. Functional
- -architecture of basal ganglia circuits: neural substrates of parallel processing. Trends Neurosci 13:226–271.
- Arbuthnott GW, Wickens J. 2007. Space, time and dopamine. Trends Neurosci 30:62–69. Carmona S, Proal E, Hoekzema EA, et al. 2009. Ventro-striatal
- response association (habit). Goal-directed and habitual selections are made in different func tional territories of the basal ganglia. 15. Insofar as diseases of the basal ganglia in humans can be interpreted as selection malfunctions, additional support is provided for the idea that
- the basal ganglia operate as a generic selection module.

Peter Redgrave

- reductions underpin symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
- Biol Psychiatry 66:972–977. Chevalier G, Deniau JM. 1990. Disinhibition as a basic process in the expression of striatal functions. Trends Neurosci 13:277–281.
- DeLong MR, Wichmann T. 2007. Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal ganglia. Arch Neurol 64:20–24. Deniau JM, Mailly P, Maurice N, Charpier S. 2007. The pars
- Rui M. Costa reticulata of the substantia nigra: a window to basal ganglia output. In: JM Tepper. ED Abercrombie, JP Bolam (eds).
- Gaba and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems. Prog Brain Res 160:151–172. Desmurget M, Turner RS. 2010. Motor sequences and the basal ganglia: kinematics, not habits. J Neurosci 30:7685–7690. Draganski B, Kherif F, Klöppel S, et al. 2008. Evidence for
- segregated and integrative connectivity patterns in the human basal ganglia. J Neurosci 28:7138–7152.
- Fan D, Rossi MA, Yin HH. 2012. Mechanisms of action selec -tion and timing in substantia nigra neurons. J Neurosci 32:5534–5548.
- Gerfen CR, Surmeier DJ. 2011. Modulation of striatal projection systems by dopamine. Ann Rev Neurosci 34:441–466. Gerfen CR, Wilson CJ. 1996. The basal ganglia. In: LW Swanson,
- A Bjorklund, T Hokfelt (eds). Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy, Vol 12: Integrated Systems of the CNS, Part III, pp.
- 371–468. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Graybiel AM. 2008. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Ann Rev Neurosci 31:359–387. Hikosaka O. 2007. Basal ganglia mechanisms of reward-
- oriented eye movement. Ann NY Acad Sci 1104:229–249.

09/12/20 5:14 PM

Suggested Reading

Cui G, Jun SB, Jin X, et al. 2013. Concurrent activation of stri-

atal direct and indirect pathways during action initiation.

## Nature 494:238–242.

- da Silva JA, Tecuapetla F, Paixão V, Costa RM. 2018. Dopamine neuron activity before action initiation gates and invigorates future movements. Nature 554:244–248.
- Grillner S, Robertson B, Stephenson-Jones M. 2013. The evolutionary origin of the vertebrate basal ganglia and its role in action selection. J Physiol 591:5425–5431.
- Hikosaka O, Ghazizadeh A, Griggs W, Amita H. 2018. Parallel basal ganglia circuits for decision making. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 125:515–529.
- Kravitz AV, Freeze BS, Parker PR, et al. 2010. Regulation of parkinsonian motor behaviours by optogenetic control of basal ganglia circuitry. Nature 466:622–626.

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 951


Part V / Movement

Howes OD, Kapur S. 2009. The dopamine hypothesis of

schizophrenia: version III—the final common pathway.

Schizophr Bull 353:549–562.

- Humphries MD, Stewart RD, Gurney KN. 2006. A physiologically plausible model of action selection and oscillatory activity in the basal ganglia. J Neurosci 26:12921–12942.
- Kelly RM, Strick PL. 2004. Macro-architecture of basal ganglia loops with the cerebral cortex: use of rabies virus to reveal multisynaptic circuits. Prog Brain Res 143:
- 449–459. Klaus A, Martins GJ, Paixao VB, Zhou P, Paninski L, Costa RM. 2017. The spatiotemporal organization of the striatum encodes action space. Neuron 95:1171–1180.
- Koob GF, Volkow ND. 2016. Neurobiology of addiction: a neurocircuitry analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 38:760–773. MacDonald AW, Schulz SC. 2009. What we know: findings
- that every theory of schizophrenia should explain. Schizophr Bull 3:493–508.
- Matsuda W, Furuta T, Nakamura KC, et al. 2009. Single nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons form widely spread and highly dense axonal arborizations in the neostriatum.
- J Neurosci 29:444–453. Matsumoto M, Takada M. 2013. Distinct representations of cognitive and motivational signals in midbrain dopamine neurons. Neuron 79:1–14.
- McHaffie JG, Stanford TR, Stein BE, Coizet V, Redgrave P. 2005. Subcortical loops through the basal ganglia. Trends Neurosci 28:401–407.
- Mink JW. 1996. The basal ganglia: focused selection and inhibition of competing motor programs. Prog Neurobiol 50:381–425.
- Minski M. 1986. The Society of Mind. London: Heinemann Ltd. Nambu A. 2011. Somatotopic organization of the primate basal ganglia. Front Neuroanat 5:26.
- Nambu A, Tokuno H, Takada M. 2002. Functional signifi-
- cance of the cortico-subthalamo-pallidal 'hyperdirect' pathway. Neurosci Res 43:111–117.
- Nasser HM, Calu DJ, Schoenbaum G, Sharpe MJ. 2017. The dopamine prediction error: contributions to associative models of reward learning. Front Psychol 8:244.
- Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. 1981. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer.

Kandel-Ch38\_0932-0952.indd 952

Piron C, Kase D, Topalidou M, et al. 2016. The globus pallidus

pars interna in goal-oriented and routine behaviors: resolv-

ing a long-standing paradox. Mov Disord 31:1146–1154.

- Plotkin JL, Surmeier DJ. 2015. Corticostriatal synaptic adaptations in Huntington's disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33:53–62.
- Redgrave P, Gurney KN. 2006. The short-latency dopamine signal: a role in discovering novel actions? Nat Rev Neurosci 7:967–975.
- Reiner AJ. 2010. The conservative evolution of the vertebrate basal ganglia. In: H Steiner, KY Tseng (eds). Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function, pp. 29–62. Burlington,
- MA: Academic Press Reiner A, Jiao Y, DelMar N, Laverghetta AV, Lei WL. 2003. Differential morphology of pyramidal tract-type and intratelencephalically projecting-type corticostriatal neu-
- rons and their intrastriatal terminals in rats. J Comp Neurol 457:420–440. Schultz W. 2007. Multiple dopamine functions at different time courses. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:259–288. Silberberg G, Bolam JP. 2015. Local and afferent synaptic path-
- ways in the striatal microcircuitry. Curr Opin Neurobiol 33:182–187.
- Smith Y, Galvan A, Ellender TJ, et al. 2014. The thalamostriatal system in normal and diseased states. Front Syst Neurosci 8:5.
- Surmeier DJ, Plotkin J, Shen W. 2009. Dopamine and synaptic plasticity in dorsal striatal circuits controlling action selection. Curr Opin Neurobiol 19:621–628.
- Tecuapetla F, Jin X, Lima SQ, Costa RM. 2016. Complementary contributions of striatal projection pathways to action initiation and execution. Cell 166:703–715.
- Thorndike EL. 1911. Animal Intelligence. New York: Macmillan. van den Heuvel OA, van Wingen G, Soriano-Mas C, et al. 2016. Brain circuitry of compulsivity. Eur Neuropsy-
- chopharmacol 26:810–827. Watabe-Uchida M, Zhu LS, Ogawa SK, Vamanrao A, Uchida N. 2012. Whole-brain mapping of direct inputs to midbrain dopamine neurons. Neuron 74:858–873.
- Yael D, Vinner E, Bar-Gad I. 2015. Pathophysiology of tic disorders. Mov Disord 30:1171–1178. Yin HH, Knowlton BJ. 2006. The role of the basal ganglia in
- habit formation. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:464–476.

09/12/20 5:14 PM


Brain–Machine Interfaces

BMIs Measure and Modulate Neural Activity to Help Restore

Lost Capabilities

Cochlear Implants and Retinal Prostheses Can Restore

## Lost Sensory Capabilities Motor and Communication BMIs Can Restore Lost

Motor Capabilities Pathological Neural Activity Can Be Regulated by Deep

Brain Stimulation and Antiseizure BMIs Replacement Part BMIs Can Restore Lost Brain

Processing Capabilities Measuring and Modulating Neural Activity Rely on

Advanced Neurotechnology BMIs Leverage the Activity of Many Neurons to Decode

Movements Decoding Algorithms Estimate Intended Movements

## From Neural Activity Discrete Decoders Estimate Movement Goals

Continuous Decoders Estimate Moment-by-Moment Details of Movements

Increases in Performance and Capabilities of Motor and

Communication BMIs Enable Clinical Translation Subjects Can Type Messages Using Communication BMIs

## Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using BMIDirected Prosthetic Arms

Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using BMI-

Directed Stimulation of Paralyzed Arms Subjects Can Use Sensory Feedback Delivered by Cortical

Stimulation During BMI Control BMIs Can Be Used to Advance Basic Neuroscience

## BMIs Raise New Neuroethics Considerations

Highlights

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 953

U

nderstanding the normal function of

the nervous system is central to understand-

ing dysfunction caused by disease or injury

and designing therapies. Such treatments include pharmacological agents, surgical interventions, and, increasingly, electronic medical devices. These medical devices fill an important gap between largely molecularly targeted and systemic medications and largely anatomically targeted and focal surgical lesions. In this chapter, we focus on medical devices that measure or alter electrophysiological activity at the level of populations of neurons. These devices are

referred to as brain–machine interfaces (BMIs), brain– computer interfaces, or neural prostheses. We use the term BMI to refer to all such devices because there is no standard distinction among them. BMIs can be organized into four broad categories: those that restore lost sensory capabilities, those that restore lost motor capabilities, those that regulate pathological neural activity, and those that restore lost brain processing capabilities. BMIs can help people perform "activities of daily living," such as feeding oneself, physically dressing and grooming oneself, maintaining continence, and

walking. A type of BMI that we will discuss extensively in this chapter converts electrical activity from neurons in the brain into signals that control prosthetic devices to help people with paralysis. By understanding how neuroscience and neuroengineering work together to create current BMIs, we can more clearly envision how many neurological diseases and injuries can be treated with medical devices.

14/12/20 9:44 AM


Part V / Movement

BMIs Measure and Modulate Neural Activity

to Help Restore Lost Capabilities

## Cochlear Implants and Retinal Prostheses Can Restore Lost Sensory Capabilities

## One of the earliest and most widely used BMIs is the cochlear implant. People with profound deafness can benefit from restoration of even some audition. Since

the 1970s, several hundred thousand people who have a peripheral cause of deafness that leaves the cochlear nerve and central auditory pathways intact have received cochlear implants. These systems have restored considerable hearing and spoken language, even to children with congenital deafness who have learned to perceive speech using cochlear implants. Cochlear implants operate by capturing sounds with a microphone that resides outside the skin and sending these signals to a receiver surgically implanted

under the skin near the ear. After conversion (encoding) to appropriate spatial-temporal signal patterns, these signals electrically stimulate spiral ganglion cells in the cochlear modiolus (Chapter 26). In turn, signals from the activated cochlear cells are transmitted through the auditory nerve to the brain stem and higher auditory areas where, ideally, the neural signals are interpreted as the sounds captured by the microphone. Another example of a BMI is a retinal prosthesis. Blindness can be caused by diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa, an inherited retinal degenerative disease.

At present, there is no cure and no approved medical therapy to slow or reverse the disease. Retinal prostheses currently enable patients to recognize large letters and locate the position of objects. They operate by capturing images with a camera and sending these signals to a receiver positioned within the eye. After conversion to appropriate spatial-temporal patterns, these electrical signals stimulate retinal ganglion cells in the retina through dozens of electrodes. In turn, these cells send their signals through the optic nerve to the thalamus and higher visual areas where, ideally, the afferent signals are interpreted as the image captured by the camera. Motor and Communication BMIs Can Restore Lost

Motor Capabilities

## BMIs are also being developed to assist paralyzed people and amputees by restoring lost motor and communication function. This is the central topic of this

chapter. First, electrical neural activity in one or more brain areas is measured using penetrating multielectrode arrays placed, for example, in the arm and

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 954

hand region of the primary motor cortex, dorsal and

ventral premotor cortex, and/or intraparietal cortex

(particularly the parietal reach region and medial

intraparietal area) (Figure 39–1) . Second, an arm movement is attempted but cannot be made in the case of people with paralysis. Action potentials and local field potentials are measured dur-

ing these attempts. With 100 electrodes placed in the primary motor cortex and another 100 in the dorsal premotor cortex, for example, action potentials from approximately 200 neurons and local field potentials from 200 electrodes are measured. Local field potentials are lower-frequency signals recorded on the same electrodes as the action potentials and believed to arise from local synaptic currents of many neurons near the electrode tips. Together, these neural signals contain considerable information about how the person wishes to move her arm. Third, the relationship between neural activity and attempted movements is characterized. This relationship makes it possible to predict the desired movement

from new neural activity, a statistical procedure we refer to as neural decoding. Fourth, the BMI is then operated in its normal mode where neural activity is measured in real time and desired movements are decoded from the neural activity by a computer. The decoded movements can be used to guide prosthetic devices, such as a cursor on a computer screen or a robotic arm. It is also possible to electrically stimulate muscles in a paralyzed limb to enact the decoded movements, a procedure known as functional electrical stimulation . Many other prosthetic devices can be envisioned as we increasingly interact with the world around us electronically (eg, smart phones, automobiles, and everyday objects that are embedded with electronics so that they can send and receive data—known as the "internet of things"). Finally, because the person can see the prosthetic device, she can alter her neural activity by thinking different thoughts on a moment-by-moment basis

so as to guide the prosthetic device more accurately. This closed-loop feedback control system can make use of nonvisual sensory modalities as well, including delivering pressure and position information from electronic sensors wrapped on or embedded in a prosthetic arm. Such surrogate sensory information can be transformed into electrical stimulation patterns that are delivered to proprioceptive and somatosensory cortex. The BMIs described above include motor and communication BMIs. Motor BMIs aim to provide natural control of a robotic limb or a paralyzed limb.

In the case of upper-limb prostheses, this involves the

14/12/20 9:44 AM

implanted in brain regions such as the primary motor cortex, Neural signals Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces Neuron 1

Neuron 2

dorsal and ventral premotor cortex, or intraparietal cortex. They record action potentials from tens to hundreds of neurons and precise movement of the arm along a desired path and

<!-- image -->

with a desired speed profile. Such control is indeed

an ambitious ultimate goal, but even intermediate

steps toward this goal could improve quality of life by restoring some lost motor function and improving the patient's ability to carry out "activities of daily living." For example, numerous people with tetraplegia could benefit from being able to feed themselves. Communication BMIs are designed to provide a fast and accurate interface with a plethora of electronic devices. The ability to move a computer cursor

around an on-screen keyboard allows a patient to type commands for computers, smart phones, voice synthesizers, smart homes, and the "internet of things." Ideally, communication BMIs would allow for a communication rate at which most people speak or type.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 955

Decoding

algorithm

local field potentials. The recorded neural activity is then con-

verted by a decoding algorithm into (1) computer commands

for controlling a computer interface or a prosthetic (robotic)

arm, or (2) stimulation patterns for functional electrical stimulation of muscles in a paralyzed arm. Such BMIs would benefit people with amyotrophic

lateral sclerosis (ALS), who often become "locked in"

and unable to communicate with the outside world

through any movements. Communication BMIs would also benefit people with other neurodegenerative diseases that severely compromise the quality of movement and speech, as well as those with upper spinal cord injury. The ability to reliably type several words per minute is a meaningful improvement in quality of life for many patients. Motor and communication BMIs build on basic neuroscientific research in voluntary movement (Chapter 34). The design and development of BMIs have

so far depended on laboratory animal research, largely with nonhuman primates; recently, however, pilot clinical trials with humans with paralysis have begun.

14/12/20 9:44 AM
implanted in brain regions such as the primary motor cortex, Neural signals Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces Neuron 1

Neuron 2

dorsal and ventral premotor cortex, or intraparietal cortex. They record action potentials from tens to hundreds of neurons and precise movement of the arm along a desired path and

<!-- image -->

with a desired speed profile. Such control is indeed

an ambitious ultimate goal, but even intermediate

steps toward this goal could improve quality of life by restoring some lost motor function and improving the patient's ability to carry out "activities of daily living." For example, numerous people with tetraplegia could benefit from being able to feed themselves. Communication BMIs are designed to provide a fast and accurate interface with a plethora of electronic devices. The ability to move a computer cursor

around an on-screen keyboard allows a patient to type commands for computers, smart phones, voice synthesizers, smart homes, and the "internet of things." Ideally, communication BMIs would allow for a communication rate at which most people speak or type.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 955

Decoding

algorithm

local field potentials. The recorded neural activity is then con-

verted by a decoding algorithm into (1) computer commands

for controlling a computer interface or a prosthetic (robotic)

arm, or (2) stimulation patterns for functional electrical stimulation of muscles in a paralyzed arm. Such BMIs would benefit people with amyotrophic

lateral sclerosis (ALS), who often become "locked in"

and unable to communicate with the outside world

through any movements. Communication BMIs would also benefit people with other neurodegenerative diseases that severely compromise the quality of movement and speech, as well as those with upper spinal cord injury. The ability to reliably type several words per minute is a meaningful improvement in quality of life for many patients. Motor and communication BMIs build on basic neuroscientific research in voluntary movement (Chapter 34). The design and development of BMIs have

so far depended on laboratory animal research, largely with nonhuman primates; recently, however, pilot clinical trials with humans with paralysis have begun.

14/12/20 9:44 AM



Part V / Movement

Pathological Neural Activity Can Be Regulated by

Deep Brain Stimulation and Antiseizure BMIs

## BMIs have been developed to help people with disorders involving pathological neural activity in the brain, such as Parkinson disease and epilepsy. People

with Parkinson disease benefit by having hand and arm tremor reduced. At present, there is no cure for Parkinson disease, and many people become resistant to pharmacological treatments. A deep brain stimulator (DBS) can help these people by delivering electrical pulses to targeted areas in the brain to disrupt the aberrant neural activity. DBS is controlled by a neurostimulator implanted in the chest, with wires to stimulating electrodes in deep brain nuclei (eg, the subthalamic nucleus). The

nuclei are continuously stimulated with these electrodes in order to alter the aberrant neural activity. This method can often greatly reduce Parkinson disease– related tremor for years. A DBS applied to different brain areas can also help people with essential tremor, dystonia, chronic pain, major depression, and obsessivecompulsive disorder. Millions of people experiencing epileptic seizures are currently treated with antiseizure medications or neurosurgery, both of which often result in incomplete

or impermanent seizure reduction. Antiseizure BMIs have shown considerable promise for further improving quality of life. These fully implanted BMIs operate by continuously monitoring neural activity in a brain region determined to be involved with seizures. They identify unusual activity that is predictive of seizure onset and then respond within milliseconds to disrupt this activity by electrically stimulating the same or a different brain region. This closed-loop response can be fast enough that seizure symptoms are not felt and seizures do not occur. Replacement Part BMIs Can Restore Lost Brain

Processing Capabilities

## BMIs are capable of restoring more than lost sensory or motor capabilities. They are, in principle, capable of

restoring internal brain processing. Of the four catego-

ries of BMIs, this is the most futuristic. An example is a "replacement part" BMI. The central idea is that if enough is known about the function of a brain region, and if this region is damaged by disease or injury, then it may be possible to replace this brain region. Once the normal input activity to a brain region is measured (see next section), the function of the lost brain region could then be modeled in electronic hard-

ware and software, and the output from this substitute

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 956

processing center would then be delivered to the next

brain region as though no injury had occurred. This

would involve, for example, reading out neural activ-

ity with electrodes, mimicking the brain region's computational functions with low-power microelectronic circuits, and then writing in electrical neural activity with stimulating electrodes. This procedure might also be used to initiate and guide neural plasticity. A replacement part BMI that is currently being investigated focuses on restoring

memory by replacing parts of the hippocampus that are damaged due to injury or disease. Another potential application would be to restore the lost functionality of a brain region damaged by stroke. These systems represent the natural evolution of the BMI concept, a so-called "platform technology" because a large number of systems can be envisioned

by mixing and matching various write-in, computational, and read-out components. The number of neurological diseases and injuries that BMIs should be able to help address ought to increase as our understanding of the functions of the nervous system and the sophistication of the technology continue to grow. Measuring and Modulating Neural Activity Rely on Advanced Neurotechnology

## Measuring and modulating neural activity involves four broad areas of electronic technologies applied to the nervous system (so-called neurotechnology). The

first area is the type of neural sensor; artificial neural sensors are designed with different levels of invasiveness and spatial resolution (Figure 39–2). Sensors that are external to the body, such as an electroencephalogram (EEG) cap, have been used extensively in recent decades. The EEG measures signals from many small metal disks (electrodes) applied to the surface of the scalp across the head. Each electrode detects average activity from a large number of neurons beneath it. More recently, implantable electrode-array techniques, such as subdural electrocorticography (ECoG) and finely spaced micro-ECoG electrodes, have been

used. Since ECoG electrodes are on the surface of the brain and are thus much closer to neurons than EEG electrodes, ECoG has higher spatial and temporal resolution and thus provides more information with which to control BMIs. Most recently, arrays of penetrating intracortical electrodes, which we focus on in this chapter, have been used. The intracortical electrode arrays are made of sil-

icon or other materials and coated with biocompatible materials. The arrays are implanted on the surface of the brain, with the electrode tips penetrating 1 to 2 mm

14/12/20 9:44 AM

EEG

ECoG

<!-- image -->

various techniques ranging from electroencephalography (EEG)

electrodes on the surface of the skin, to electrocorticography (ECoG) electrodes on the surface of the brain, to intracortical into the cortex. They have the ability to record action potentials from individual neurons, as well as local

field potentials from small clusters of neurons near

each electrode tip. The electrodes are able to record high-fidelity signals because they are inserted into the brain, bringing the electrode tips within micrometers of neurons. This is beneficial for BMI performance because individual neurons are the fundamental information-encoding units in the nervous system, and action potentials are the fundamental units of the digital code that carries information from the input to the output region of a neuron. Moreover, intracortical electrodes can deliver electrical microstimulation to either disrupt neural activity (eg, DBS) or write in surrogate information (eg, proprioceptive or somatosensory information). The second area of neurotechnology is scaling up the number of neurons measured at the same time. While one neuron contains some information about a

person's intended movement, tens to hundreds of neurons are needed to move a BMI more naturally, and even more neurons are needed to approach naturalistic levels of motor function. Although it is possible to

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 957

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces

Intracortical electrodes

electrodes implanted in the outer 1 to 2 mm of cortex. The

signals that can be measured range from the average of many

neurons, to averages across fewer neurons, and finally to

action potentials from individual neurons. (Adapted, with permission, from Blabe et al. 2015.) place electrode arrays in many areas across the brain, thereby gaining more information from multiple areas,

a key challenge is to measure activity from thousands

of neurons within each individual brain area. Many efforts are underway to achieve this goal, including use of electrode arrays with many tiny shafts, each with hundreds of electrode contacts along its length; many tiny electrodes that are not physically wired together, but are instead inserted into the brain as stand-alone islands that transmit data outside of the head and receive power wirelessly; and optical imaging technologies that can capture the activity of hundreds or more neurons by detecting how each neuron's fluorescence changes over time. The third area is low-power electronics for signal acquisition, wireless data communications, and wireless powering. In contrast to the BMI systems

described above, which implant a passive electrode array in which each electrode is wired to the outside world by a connector passing through the skin, future BMIs will be fully implanted like DBS systems. Electronic circuits are needed to amplify neural signals, digitize them, process them (eg, to detect when

14/12/20 9:44 AM



Part V / Movement

an action potential occurred or to estimate local field

potential power), and transmit this information to a

nearby receiver incorporated into a prosthetic arm,

for example. Power consumption must be minimized for two reasons. First, the more power is consumed, the more power a battery or a wireless charging system would need to provide. Batteries would therefore need to be larger and replaced more often, and delivering power wirelessly is challenging. Second, using power generates heat, and the brain can only tolerate a small temperature increase before there are deleterious effects. These trade-offs are similar to those of smart phones, which represent the current best technology available for low-power electronics. The final area is so-called supervisory systems. Software running on electronic hardware is at the heart of BMIs. Some software implements the math-

ematical operations of the neural decoding, while other software must tend to aspects of the BMI's overall operation. For example, the supervisory software should monitor whether or not a person wishes to use the prosthesis (eg, if the person is sleeping); if neural signals have changed, thereby requiring recalibration of the decoder; and overall BMI performance and safety. Having discussed the range of different BMIs and neurotechnologies being developed, in the rest of this chapter we focus on motor and communication BMIs.

We first describe different types of decoding algorithms and how they work. We then describe recent progress in BMI development toward assisting paralyzed people and amputees. Next, we consider how sensory feedback can improve BMI performance and how BMIs can be used as an experimental paradigm to address basic scientific questions about brain function. Finally, we conclude with a cautionary note about ethical issues that can arise with BMIs. BMIs Leverage the Activity of Many Neurons

to Decode Movements

## Various aspects of movement—including position, velocity, acceleration, and force—are encoded in the

activity of neurons throughout the motor system

(Chapter 34). Even though our understanding of movement encoding in the motor system is incomplete, there is usually a reliable relationship between aspects of movement and neural activity. This reliable relationship allows us to estimate the desired movement from neural activity, a key component of a BMI. To study movement encoding, one typically considers the activity of an individual neuron across

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 958

repeated movements (referred to as "trials") to the

same target. The activity of the neuron can be averaged

across many trials to create a spike histogram for each

target (Figure 39–3A). By comparing the spike histograms for different targets, one can characterize how the neuron's activity varies with the movement produced. One can also assess using the spike histograms whether the neuron is more involved in movement preparation or movement execution. In contrast, estimating a subject's desired movement from neural activity (referred to as movement decoding) needs to be performed on an individual

trial while the neural activity is being recorded. The activity of a single neuron cannot unambiguously provide such information. Thus, the BMI must monitor the activity of many neurons on a single trial (Figure 39–3B) rather than one neuron on many trials. A desired movement can be decoded from the neural activity associated with either preparation or execution of the movement. Whereas preparation activity is related to the movement goal execution activity is related to the moment-by-moment details of movement (Chapter 34) . Millions of neurons across multiple brain areas work together to produce a movement as simple as reaching for a cup. Yet in many BMIs, desired move-

ments can be decoded reasonably accurately from the activity of dozens of neurons recorded from a single brain area. Although this may seem surprising, the fact is that the motor system has a great deal of redundancy—many neurons carry similar information about a desired movement (Chapter 34). This is reasonable because millions of neurons are involved in controlling the contractions of dozens of muscles. Thus, most of the neurons in regions of dorsal premotor cortex and primary motor cortex controlling arm movement are informative about most arm movements. When decoding a movement, the activity of one neuron provides only incomplete information about the movement, whereas the activity of many neurons

can provide substantially more accurate information about the movement. This is true for activity associated with both movement preparation and execution. There are two reasons why using multiple neurons is helpful for decoding. First, a typical neuron alone cannot unambiguously determine the intended movement direction. Consider a neuron whose activity (during either preparation or execution) is related to movement direction via a cosine function, known as a tuning curve (Figure 39–4A). If this neuron fires at 30 spikes per second, the intended movement direction could be either 120° or 240°. However, by recording from a second neuron whose tuning curve is different from that of the first neuron, the movement direction can be

14/12/20 9:44 AM

<!-- image -->

whereas movement decoding uses the activity of many

neurons on individual experimental trials. A. Activity of one neuron recorded in the dorsal premotor cortex of a monkey preparing and executing leftward arm movements (left) and rightward arm movements (right). Char-

acterizing the movement encoding of a neuron involves determining how the activity of the neuron on repeated leftward or rightward movements (each row of spike trains) relates to aspects of arm movement. Below is the spike histogram for this neuron for leftward and rightward movements, obtained by averaging neural activity across trials. This neuron shows a greater level of preparation activity for leftward movements and a greater level of execution activity for rightward movements. Many neurons in the dorsal premotor cortex and primary motor cortex show movement-related activity in both the preparation and execution epochs like the neuron shown.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 959

rightward movement (right). The spike trains for neuron 1 corre-

spond to those shown in part A. Spike counts are taken during the preparation epoch, typically in a large time bin of 100 ms or longer to estimate movement goal. In contrast, spike counts are taken during the execution epoch typically in many smaller time bins, each lasting tens of milliseconds. Using such short time bins provides the temporal resolution needed to estimate the moment-by-moment details of the movement. C. Neural decoding involves extracting movement information from many neurons on a single experimental trial. In the subject's workspace, there are eight possible targets (circles). Dis-

crete decoding (see Figure 39–5) extracts the target location; the estimated target is filled in with gray. In contrast, continuous decoding (see Figure 39–6) extracts the moment-bymoment details of the movement; the orange dot represents the estimated position at one moment in time.

14/12/20 9:44 AM


Part V / Movement

A One neuron Neuron 1

activity Neuron 1

activity

<!-- image -->

A. The tuning curve of one neuron defines how the neuron's

activity varies with movement direction. If this neuron shows activity of 30 spikes/s, it could correspond to movement in the

120° or 240° direction.

B. A second neuron (green) with a different tuning curve shows activity of 5 spikes/s, which could correspond to

more accurately determined. If the second neuron fires at 5 spikes per second, corresponding to a movement

in either the 60° or 120° direction, the only movement

direction that is consistent between the two neurons is 120° (Figure 39–4B). Thus, by recording from these two neurons simultaneously, the intended reach direction can be determined more accurately than by recording from one neuron. (However, two neurons do not necessarily provide a perfect estimate of the intended reach direction due to noise, as described next.) The second reason why decoding a movement from the activity of several neurons gives greater accuracy is because a neuron's activity level usually varies

across repeated movements in the same direction. This variability is typically referred to as spiking "noise." Let us say that due to spiking noise the first neuron fires at slightly less than 30 spikes per second and the second neuron fires at slightly more than 5 spikes per second (Figure 39–4C). Under these conditions, no single movement direction is consistent with the activity level of both neurons. Instead, a compromise must be made between the two neurons to determine a move ment direction that is as consistent as possible with their activities. By extending this concept to more than two neurons, the movement direction can be decoded even more accurately as the number of neurons increases. Decoding Algorithms Estimate Intended Movements From Neural Activity which is determined to be the decoded direction.

C. Because neural activity is "noisy" (represented as a vertical displacement of the dashed lines), it is usually not possible to conclusively determine the movement direction from the

activity of two neurons. Here, no one movement direction is consistent with the activity of both neurons. and continuous (Figure 39–3C). A discrete decoder esti-

mates one of several possible movement goals. Each

of these movement goals could correspond to a letter

on a keyboard. A discrete decoder solves a classification problem in statistics and can be applied to either preparation activity or execution activity. A continuous decoder estimates the moment-by-moment details of a movement trajectory. This is important, for example, for reaching around obstacles or turning a steering wheel. A continuous decoder solves a regression problem in statistics and is usually applied to execution activity rather than preparation activity because the moment-by-moment details of a movement can be more accurately estimated from execution activity (Chapter 34). Motor BMIs must produce movement trajectories as accurately as possible to achieve the desired movement and typically use a continuous decoder

## Movement decoders are a central component of BMIs. There are two types of BMI decoders: discrete

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 960

-to do this. In contrast, communication BMIs are concerned with enabling the individual to transmit information as rapidly as possible. Thus, the speed and accuracy with which movement goals (or keys on a keyboard) can be selected are of primary importance. Communication BMIs can use a discrete decoder to directly select a desired key on a keyboard or a continuous decoder to continuously guide the cursor to the desired key, where only the key eventually struck actually contributes to information conveyance. This seemingly subtle distinction has implications that influence the type of neural activity required and therefore the brain area that is targeted, as well as the type of decoder that is used.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

B Two neurons (noiseless)

C Two neurons (noisy)

Noise

Neuron 1

activity

Neuron 2

activity

Noise


Neural decoding involves two phases: calibra-

tion and ongoing use. In the calibration phase, the

relationship between neural activity and movement

is characterized by a statistical model. This can be achieved by recording neural activity while a paralyzed person attempts to move, imagines moving, or passively observes movements of a computer cursor or robotic limb. Once the relationship has been defined, the statistical model can then be used to decode new observed neural activity (ongoing use phase). The goal during the ongoing use phase is to find the movement that is most consistent with the observed neural activity (Figure 39–4B,C). Discrete Decoders Estimate Movement Goals

We first define a population activity space, where each

## axis represents the firing rate of one neuron. On each

trial (ie, movement repetition), we can measure the fir-

ing rate of each neuron during a specified period, and together they yield one point in the population activity space. Across many trials, involving multiple movement goals, there will be a scatter of points in the population activity space. If the neural activity is related to the movement goal, then the points will be separated in the population activity space according to the movement goal (Figure 39–5A). During the calibration phase, decision boundaries that partition the population A Calibration phase

Boundaries

moved to optimize

discrimination


decision boundaries define a region in the population activity

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces


activity space into different regions are determined

by a statistical model. Each region corresponds to one

movement goal.

During the ongoing use phase, we measure new neural activity for which the movement goal is unknown (Figure 39–5B). The decoded movement goal

is determined by the region in which the neural activity lies. For example, if the neural activity lies within the region corresponding to the leftward target, then the discrete decoder would guess that the subject intended to move to the leftward target on that trial. It is possible that the subject intended to move to the rightward target, even though the recorded activity lies within the region corresponding to the leftward target. In this case, the discrete decoder would incorrectly estimate the subject's intended movement goal. Decoding accuracy typically increases with an increasing number of simultaneously recorded neurons. Continuous Decoders Estimate Moment-by-Moment Details of Movements

## Arm position, velocity, acceleration, force, and other aspects of arm movement can be decoded using the

methods described here with varying levels of accu-

B Ongoing use phase racy. For concreteness, we will discuss decoding movement velocity because it is one of the quantities most strongly reflected in the activity of motor cortical

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

two neurons, where each axis represents the firing rate of one

## neuron. On each trial (ie, movement repetition), the activity of

the two neurons together defines one point in the population activity space. Each point is colored by the movement goal, which is known during the calibration phase. Decision boundaries (dashed lines) are determined by a statistical model to optimize discrimination among the movement goals. The

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 961

B. Ongoing use phase. During this phase, the decision bounda-

ries are fixed. If we record new neural activity (square) for which the movement goal is unknown, the movement goal is

determined by the region in which the neural activity lies. In this case, the neural activity lies in the region corresponding to the leftward target, so the decoder would guess that the subject intended to move to the leftward target.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

Boundaries

xed

Left


Part V / Movement

neurons and is the starting point for the design of most

BMI systems.

Consider a population of neurons whose level of

activity indicates the movement velocity (ie, speed and direction). During the calibration phase, a "pushing

vector" is determined for each neuron (Figure 39–6A). A pushing vector indicates how a neuron's activity influences movement velocity. Various continuous decoding algorithms differ in how they determine the pushing vectors. One of the earliest decoding algorithms, the population vector algorithm (PVA), assigns each neuron's pushing vector to point along the neuron's preferred direction (see Figure 34–22A). A neuron's preferred direction is defined as the direction of movement for which the neuron shows the highest level of activity (ie, peak of curves in Figure 39–4). Much of the pioneering work on BMIs used the PVA. However, the PVA does not take into account the properties of the spiking noise (ie, its variance and covariance across neurons), which influences the accuracy of the decoded movements. A more accurate decoder, the optimal linear estimator (OLE), incorporates the properties of the spiking noise to determine the pushing vectors. During the ongoing use phase, the pushing vectors are each scaled by the number of spikes emitted by the corresponding neuron at each time step (Figure

39–6B). At each time step, the decoded movement is the vector sum of the scaled pushing vectors across all neurons. The decoded movement represents a change in position during one time step (ie, velocity). The BMI cursor (or limb) position (Figure 39–6C) is then updated according to the decoded movement. To further improve decoding accuracy, the estimation of velocity at each time step should take into account not only current neural activity (as illustrated

in Figure 39–6), but also neural activity in the recent past. The rationale is that movement velocity (and other kinematic variables) changes gradually over time, and so neural activity in the recent past should

Figure 39–6 (Opposite) Continuous decoding.

A. During the calibration phase, a pushing vector is determined

for each of 97 neurons. Each vector represents one neuron

## and indicates how one spike from that neuron drives a change

in position per time step (ie, velocity). Thus, the units of the

plot are millimeters per spike during one time step. Different neurons can have pushing vectors of different magnitudes and directions. B. During ongoing use, spikes are recorded from the same neurons as in panel A during movement execution. At each time step, the new length of an arrow is obtained by starting

with its previous length in panel A and scaling it by the number

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 962

be informative about the movement velocity. This

can be achieved by temporally smoothing the neural

activity before applying a PVA or OLE or by using a

Kalman filter to define a statistical model describing how movement velocity (or other kinematic variables) changes smoothly over time. With a Kalman filter, the estimated velocity is a combination of the scaled pushing vectors at the current time step (as in Figure 39–6B) and the estimated velocity at the previous time step. Indeed, continuous decoding algorithms that take into account neural activity in the recent past have been shown to provide higher decoding accuracy than those that do not. The Kalman filter and its extensions are widely used in BMIs and among the most accurate continuous decoding algorithms available. Increases in Performance and Capabilities

of Motor and Communication BMIs Enable

Clinical Translation

## Patients with paralysis wish to perform activities of daily living. For people with ALS or upper spinal cord

injury who are unable to speak or to move their arms,

the most desired tasks are often the ability to communicate, to move a prosthetic (robotic) arm, or to move the paralyzed arm by stimulating the musculature. Having described how neural signals can be read out from motor areas of the brain and how these electrical signals can be decoded to arrive at BMI control signals, we now describe recent progress toward restoring these abilities. The majority of laboratory studies are carried out in able-bodied nonhuman primates, although paralysis is sometimes transiently induced in important control

experiments. Three types of experimental paradigms are in broad use, differing in the exact way in which arm behavior is instructed and visual feedback is provided during BMI calibration and ongoing use. Setting

of spikes produced by the neuron of the same color during that

time step. If a neuron does not fire, there is no arrow for that

neuron during that time step. The decoded movement (black

arrow) is the vector sum of the scaled pushing vectors, repre-

senting a change in position during one time step (ie, velocity). For a given neuron, the direction of its scaled pushing vectors is the same across all time steps. However, the magnitudes of the scaled pushing vectors can change from one time step to the next depending on the level of activity of that neuron. C. The decoded movements from panel B are used to update the position of a computer cursor (orange dot), robotic limb, or paralyzed limb at each time step.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

A Calibration phase

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 963

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces

60 ms

5 spikes


14/12/20 9:44 AM


Part V / Movement

these differences aside, we focus below on how BMIs

function and perform. We also highlight recent pilot

clinical trials with people with paralysis.

Subjects Can Type Messages Using Communication BMIs

## To investigate how quickly and accurately a communication BMI employing a discrete decoder and prepa-

ration activity can operate, monkeys were trained to

fixate and touch central targets and prepare to reach to a peripheral target that could appear at one of several different locations on a computer screen. Spikes were recorded using electrodes implanted in the premotor cortex. The number of spikes occurring during a particular time window during the preparation epoch was used to predict where the monkey was preparing to reach (Figure 39–7A). If the decoded target matched the peripheral target, a liquid reward was provided to indicate a successful trial. By varying the duration of the period in which spike counts are taken and the number of possible targets, it was possible to assess the speed and accuracy

A Experimental setup of target selections (Figure 39–7B). Decoding accuracy tended to increase with the period in which spike counts are taken because spiking noise is more easily averaged out in longer periods. An important metric for efficient communication is information transfer rate (ITR), which measures how much information can be conveyed per unit time.

= 8

-

A basic unit of information is a bit, which is specified by a binary value (0 or 1). For example, with three bits of information, one can specify which of 2 3 possible targets or keys to press. Thus, the metric for ITR is bits per second (bps). ITR increases with the period in which spike counts are taken, then declines. The reason is that ITR takes into account both how accu rately and how quickly each target is selected. Beyond some point of diminishing returns of a longer period, accuracy fails to increase rapidly enough to overcome the slowdown in target-selection rate accompanying a longer period. Overall performance (ITR) increases with the number of possible targets, despite a decrease in decoding accuracy, because each correct target selection conveys

B Single-trial decoding accuracy decreases and more information. Fast and accurate communication

ITR increases as more target locations are used

2 targets

4 targets

<!-- image -->

8 targets

16 targets

200 300 400 500

<!-- image -->

Time

Discrete decoder

Left

Up

Neuron 1 (spikes/s)

Figure 39–7 A communication brain–machine interface can

(blue square), the discrete decoder guessed the target the

control a computer cursor using a discrete decoder based

on neural activity during the preparation epoch.

A. After a monkey touched a central target (large yellow square) and fixated a central point (red +), a peripheral target (small yellow square) appeared and the monkey prepared

to reach to it. Spike counts were taken during the preparation epoch and fed into a discrete decoder. The duration of the period in which spike counts are taken (ie, width of light blue shading) affects decoding performance and information transfer rate (ITR) (see panel B). Based on the spike counts

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 964

monkey was preparing to reach to.

B. Decoding accuracy (black) and information transfer rate (ITR

,

bits/s; red) are shown for different trial lengths and numbers of targets. Trial length was equal to the duration of the period in which

spike counts were taken (varied during the experiment) plus 190 ms (fixed during the experiment). The latter provided time for visual information of the peripheral target to reach the premotor cortex (150 ms), plus the time to decode the target location from neural activity and render the decoded target location on the screen (40 ms). (Adapted, with permission, from Santhanam et al. 2006.)

Neurons









ITR (bps)

14/12/20 9:44 AM
Part V / Movement

these differences aside, we focus below on how BMIs

function and perform. We also highlight recent pilot

clinical trials with people with paralysis.

Subjects Can Type Messages Using Communication BMIs

## To investigate how quickly and accurately a communication BMI employing a discrete decoder and prepa-

ration activity can operate, monkeys were trained to

fixate and touch central targets and prepare to reach to a peripheral target that could appear at one of several different locations on a computer screen. Spikes were recorded using electrodes implanted in the premotor cortex. The number of spikes occurring during a particular time window during the preparation epoch was used to predict where the monkey was preparing to reach (Figure 39–7A). If the decoded target matched the peripheral target, a liquid reward was provided to indicate a successful trial. By varying the duration of the period in which spike counts are taken and the number of possible targets, it was possible to assess the speed and accuracy

A Experimental setup of target selections (Figure 39–7B). Decoding accuracy tended to increase with the period in which spike counts are taken because spiking noise is more easily averaged out in longer periods. An important metric for efficient communication is information transfer rate (ITR), which measures how much information can be conveyed per unit time.

= 8

-

A basic unit of information is a bit, which is specified by a binary value (0 or 1). For example, with three bits of information, one can specify which of 2 3 possible targets or keys to press. Thus, the metric for ITR is bits per second (bps). ITR increases with the period in which spike counts are taken, then declines. The reason is that ITR takes into account both how accu rately and how quickly each target is selected. Beyond some point of diminishing returns of a longer period, accuracy fails to increase rapidly enough to overcome the slowdown in target-selection rate accompanying a longer period. Overall performance (ITR) increases with the number of possible targets, despite a decrease in decoding accuracy, because each correct target selection conveys

B Single-trial decoding accuracy decreases and more information. Fast and accurate communication

ITR increases as more target locations are used

2 targets

4 targets

<!-- image -->

8 targets

16 targets

200 300 400 500

<!-- image -->

Time

Discrete decoder

Left

Up

Neuron 1 (spikes/s)

Figure 39–7 A communication brain–machine interface can

(blue square), the discrete decoder guessed the target the

control a computer cursor using a discrete decoder based

on neural activity during the preparation epoch.

A. After a monkey touched a central target (large yellow square) and fixated a central point (red +), a peripheral target (small yellow square) appeared and the monkey prepared

to reach to it. Spike counts were taken during the preparation epoch and fed into a discrete decoder. The duration of the period in which spike counts are taken (ie, width of light blue shading) affects decoding performance and information transfer rate (ITR) (see panel B). Based on the spike counts

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 964

monkey was preparing to reach to.

B. Decoding accuracy (black) and information transfer rate (ITR

,

bits/s; red) are shown for different trial lengths and numbers of targets. Trial length was equal to the duration of the period in which

spike counts were taken (varied during the experiment) plus 190 ms (fixed during the experiment). The latter provided time for visual information of the peripheral target to reach the premotor cortex (150 ms), plus the time to decode the target location from neural activity and render the decoded target location on the screen (40 ms). (Adapted, with permission, from Santhanam et al. 2006.)

Neurons









ITR (bps)

14/12/20 9:44 AM

has been demonstrated in BMIs with this design based

on a discrete decoder applied to preparatory activity.

The ITR of this BMI is approximately 6.5 bps, which

corresponds to approximately two to three targets per second with greater than 90% accuracy. Recent studies have also investigated how quickly and accurately a communication BMI employing a continuous decoder and execution activity can oper-

ate. Two different types of continuous decoders were evaluated: a standard Kalman filter decoding movement velocity (V-KF) and a recalibrated feedback intention-trained Kalman filter (ReFIT-KF). The V-KF was calibrated using the neural activity recorded during actual arm movements (ie, open-loop control). The ReFIT-KF incorporated the closed-loop nature of BMIs into decoder calibration by assuming that the user desired to move the cursor straight to the target at each time step. To assess performance, both types of decoders were used in closed-loop BMI control (Figure 39–8A). Monkeys were required to move a computer cursor

from a central location to eight peripheral locations and back. A gold standard for performance evaluation was established by having the monkeys also perform the same task using arm movements. The ReFIT-KF outperformed the V-KF in several ways: Cursor movements using ReFIT-KF were straighter, producing less movement away from a straight line to the target; cursor movements were faster, approaching the speed of arm movements (Figure 39–8B); and there were fewer (potentially frustrating) long trials. Given its performance benefits, the ReFIT-KF is being used in clinical trials by people with paralysis (Figure 39–8C). Spiking activity was recorded using

a 96-channel electrode array implanted in the hand control area of the left motor cortex. Signals were filtered to extract action potentials and high-frequency local field potentials, which were decoded to provide "point-and-click" control of the BMI-controlled cursor. The subject was seated in front of a computer monitor and was asked, "How did you encourage your sons to practice music?" By attempting to move her right hand, the computer cursor moved across the screen and stopped over the desired letter. By attempting to squeeze her left hand, the letter beneath the cursor was selected, much like clicking a mouse button. BMI performance in the clinical trials was assessed by measuring the number of intended characters subjects were able to type (Figure 39–8D). Subjects were

able to demonstrate that the letters they typed were intended by using the delete key to erase occasional mistakes. These clinical tests showed that it is possible to type at a rate of many words per minute using a BMI.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 965

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces

Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using

BMI-Directed Prosthetic Arms

## Patients with paralysis would like to pick up objects, feed themselves, and generally interact physically

with the world. Motor BMIs with prosthetic limbs

aim to restore this lost motor functionality. As before, neural activity is decoded from the brain but is now routed to a robotic arm where the wrist is moved in three dimensions (x, y, and z) and the hand is moved in an additional dimension (grip angle, ranging from an open hand to a closed hand). In one test of a robotic arm, a patient with paralysis was able to use her neural activity to direct the robotic arm to reach out, grab a bottle of liquid, and bring it

to her mouth (Figure 39–9). The three-dimensional reaches and gripping were slower and less accurate than natural arm and hand movements. Importantly, this demonstrated that the same BMI paradigm originally developed with animals, including measuring and decoding signals from motor cortex, works in people even years after the onset of neural degeneration or the time of neural injury. BMI devices directing prosthetic arms and hands are now able to do more than just control threedimensional movement or open and close the hand.

They can also orient the hand and grasp, manipulate, and carry objects. A person with paralysis was able to move a prosthetic limb with 10 degrees of freedom to grasp objects of different shapes and sizes and move them from one place to another (Figure 39–10). Completion times for grasping and moving objects were considerably slower than natural arm movements, but the results are encouraging. These studies illustrate the existing capabilities of prosthetic arms and also the potential for even greater capabilities in the future. Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using

BMI-Directed Stimulation of Paralyzed Arms

## An alternative to using a robotic arm is to restore lost motor function to the biological arm. Arm paralysis

results from the loss of neural signaling from the spinal

cord and brain, but the muscles themselves are often still intact and can be made to contract by electrical stimulation. This capacity underlies functional electrical stimulation (FES), which sends electrical signals via internal or external electrodes to a set of muscle groups. By shaping and timing the electrical signals sent to the different muscle groups, FES is able to move the arm and hand in a coordinated fashion to pick up objects. Laboratory studies in monkeys have demonstrated that this basic approach is viable in principle.

14/12/20 9:44 AM



A

Part V / Movement

Arm V-KF


ReFIT-KF


<!-- image -->

based on neural activity during the execution epoch.

A. Comparison of cursor control by a monkey using its arm, a standard decoder that estimates velocity (BMI with Kalman filter decoding movement velocity [V-KF]), and a feedback

intention-trained decoder (BMI with recalibrated feedback intention-trained Kalman filter [ReFIT-KF]). Traces show cursor movements to and from targets alternating in the sequence indicated by the numbers shown. Traces are continuous for the duration of all reaches. (Adapted, with permission, from Gilja et al. 2012.)

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 966

B


Subject T7 (with ALS)

539 548

Days since implant

standard error of the mean). (Adapted, with permission, from

- Gilja et al. 2012.) C. Pilot clinical trial participant T6 (53-year-old female with amyotrophic later sclerosis [ALS]) using a BMI to type the answer to a question. (Adapted, with permission, from Pandarinath et al. 2017.)
- D. Performance in a typing task for three clinical trial participants. Performance can be sustained across days or even years after array implantation. (Adapted, with permission, from
- Pandarinath et al. 2017.)

14/12/20 9:44 AM

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

interface using a continuous decoder.  Three sequential

images from the first successful trial show the subject using the robotic arm to grasp the bottle, bring it to her mouth and drink coffee through a straw, and place the bottle back on the table. (Adapted from Hochberg et al. 2012.) It is implemented by calibrating a continuous decoder to predict the intended activity of each of several of

the muscles, transiently paralyzed with a nerve block.

These predictions are then used to control the intensity of stimulation of the same paralyzed muscles, which in turn controls motor outputs such as a grip angle and force. This process in effect bypasses the spinal cord and restores some semblance of voluntary control

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 967

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces


of the paralyzed arm and hand. Similar results have

recently been demonstrated in patients with paraly-

sis using either externally applied or fully implanted

state-of-the-art FES electrodes. Intracortically recorded signals from motor cortex were decoded to restore movement via FES in a person with upper spinal cord injury (Figure 39–11). The subject was able to achieve control of different wrist and hand motions, including finger movements, and perform various activities of daily living. Subjects Can Use Sensory Feedback Delivered

by Cortical Stimulation During BMI Control

## During arm movements, we rely on multiple sources of sensory feedback to guide the arm along a desired path

or to a desired goal. These sources include visual, pro-

prioceptive, and somatosensory feedback. However, in most current BMI systems, the user receives only visual feedback about the movements of the computer cursor or robotic limb. In patients with normal motor output pathways but lacking proprioception, arm movements are substantially less accurate than in healthy individuals, both in terms of movement direction and extent. Furthermore, in tests of BMI cursor control in healthy nonhuman primate subjects, the arm continues to provide proprioceptive feedback even though arm movements are not required to move the cursor. BMI cursor control is more accurate when the arm is passively moved together with the BMI cursor along the same path, rather than along a different path. This demonstrates the importance of "correct" proprioceptive feedback. Based on these two lines of evidence, it is perhaps not surprising that BMI-directed movements relying solely on visual feedback are slower and less accurate than normal arm movements. This has moti -vated recent attempts to demonstrate how providing surrogate (ie, artificial) proprioceptive or somatosensory feedback can improve BMI performance. Several studies have attempted to write in sensory information by stimulating the brain using cortical electrical microstimulation. Laboratory animals

can discriminate current pulses of different frequencies and amplitudes, and this ability can be utilized to provide proprioceptive or somatosensory information in BMIs by using different pulse frequencies to encode different physical locations (akin to proprioception) or different textures (akin to somatic sensation). Electrical microstimulation in the primary somatosensory cortex can be used by nonhuman primates to control a cursor on a moment-by-moment basis without vision. In these subjects, the use of electrical microstimulation

14/12/20 9:44 AM


Part V / Movement

A Robotic hand congurations B Using the robotic hand to grasp objects B. A subject uses the prosthetic arm to pick up an object and

<!-- image -->

A. Examples of different hand configurations directed by the

BMI. The 10 degrees of freedom are three-dimensional arm translation, three-dimensional wrist orientation, and four-

dimensional hand shaping. and visual feedback together led to more accurate movements than either type of sensory feedback alone.

Furthermore, electrical microstimulation in the pri-

mary somatosensory cortex can also be used to provide tactile information. Nonhuman primates moved a BMI-

directed cursor under visual feedback to hit different visual targets, each of which elicited a different stimulation frequency. Subjects learned to use differences in the stimulation feedback to distinguish the rewarded target from the unrewarded targets. This demonstrates that electrical microstimulation can also be used to provide somatosensory feedback during BMI control. Finally, surrogate somatosensory information was delivered via electrical microstimulation to a person with paralysis and compromised sensory afferents.

The person reported naturalistic sensations at different locations of his hand and fingers corresponding to different locations of stimulation in the primary somatosensory cortex.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 968

C. Objects of different shapes and sizes are used to test the

- generalization ability of the BMI. (Adapted from Wodlinger et al. 2015.)
- BMIs Can Be Used to Advance

Basic Neuroscience

## BMIs are becoming an increasingly important experimental tool for addressing basic scientific questions

about brain function. For example, cochlear implants

have provided insight into how the brain processes sounds and speech, how the development of these mechanisms is shaped by language acquisition, and how neural plasticity allows the brain to interpret a few channels of stimulation carrying impoverished auditory information. Similarly, motor and communication BMIs are helping to elucidate the neural mechanisms underlying sensorimotor control. Such scientific findings can then be used to refine the design of BMIs. The key benefit of BMIs for basic science is that they can simplify the brain's input and output interface with the outside world, without simplifying the com-

plexities of brain processing that one wishes to study.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

Figure 39–11 A motor brain–machine interface (BMI) can

control the muscles of a paralyzed arm using a continuous

decoder and functional electrical stimulation. Neural activity Electrode array Motor cortex

recorded in the motor cortex is decoded into command signals that control the stimulation of deltoid, pectoralis major, biceps, triceps, forearm, and hand muscles. This enables cortical control of whole-arm movements and grasping. Muscle stimulation is performed through percutaneous intramuscular fine-wire electrodes. (Adapted, with permission, from Ajiboye et al. 2017. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd.)

<!-- image -->

To illustrate this point, consider the output interface of Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces


Decoding

algorithm

External

stimulator

of output neurons in a BMI, and BMI-directed move-

the brain for controlling arm movements. Thousands

of neurons from the motor cortex and other brain areas

send signals down the spinal cord and to the arm, where they activate muscles that move the arm. Understanding how the brain controls arm movement is challenging because one can typically record from only a small fraction of the output neurons that send signals down the spinal cord, the relationship between the activity of the output neurons and arm movements is unknown, and the arm has nonlinear dynamics that are difficult to measure. Furthermore, it is usually difficult to determine which recorded neurons are output neurons. One way to ease this difficulty is to use a BMI. Because of the way a BMI is constructed, only those neurons that are recorded can directly affect the move-

ment of the cursor or robotic limb. Neurons throughout the brain are still involved, but they can influence the cursor movements only indirectly through the recorded neurons. Thus, in contrast to arm and eye movement studies, one can record from the entire set

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 969

ments can be causally attributed to specific changes in

the activity of the recorded neurons. Furthermore, the

mapping between the activity of the recorded neurons and cursor movement is defined by the experimenter, so it is fully known. This mapping can be defined to be simple and can be easily altered by the experimenter during an experiment. In essence, a BMI defines a simplified sensorimotor loop, whose components are more concretely defined and more easily manipulated than for arm or eye movements. These advantages of BMIs allow for studies of brain function that are currently difficult to perform using arm or eye movements. For example, one class

of studies involves using BMIs to study how the brain learns. The BMI mapping defines which population activity patterns will allow the subject to successfully move the BMI-directed cursor to hit visual targets. By defining the BMI mapping appropriately, the experimenter can challenge the subject's brain to produce novel neural activity patterns.

14/12/20 9:44 AM


Part V / Movement

A recent study explored what types of activity

patterns are easier and more difficult for the brain to

generate. They found that it was easier for subjects to

learn new associations between existing activity patterns and cursor movements than to generate novel activity patterns. This finding has implications for our ability to learn everyday skills. A second class of studies involves asking how the activity of neurons that directly control movement differ from those that do not directly control movement. In a BMI, one can choose to use only a subset of the recorded neurons (the output neurons) for controlling movements. At the same time, other neurons (the nonoutput neurons) can be passively monitored without being used for controlling movements. Comparing the activity of output and nonoutput neurons can provide insight into how a network of neurons internally processes information and relays only some of that information to other networks. Using this paradigm, a recent study recorded neural activity simultaneously in the primary cortex and striatum and designated a subset of the M1 neu-

rons as the output neurons for controlling the BMI. They found that, during BMI learning, M1 neurons that were most relevant for behavior (the output neurons) preferentially increased their coordination with the striatum, which is known to play an important role during natural behavior (Chapter 38). Identifying output versus nonoutput neurons in a study using arm or eye movements would be challenging. BMIs Raise New Neuroethics Considerations

A growing number of biomedical ethics considerations

## centered on the brain have arisen from the dramatic

expansion in our understanding of neuroscience and

our capabilities with neurotechnology. These advances are driven by society's curiosity about the functioning of the brain, the least-well understood organ in the body, as well as the desire to address the massive unmet need of those suffering from neurological disease and injury. The use of BMIs raises new ethical questions for four principal reasons. First, recording high-fidelity signals (ie, spike trains) involves risk, including the risks associated with initial implantation of the electrodes as well

as possible biological (immunological or infectious) responses during the lifetime of the electrodes and the associated implanted electronics. Electrodes implanted for long periods currently have functional lifetimes on the order of many months to a few years, during which

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 970

time glial scar tissue can form around the electrodes

and electrode materials can fail. Efforts to increase the

functional lifetime of electrodes range from nanoscale

flexible electrodes made with new materials to mitigating immunological responses, as is done with cardiac stents. For these reasons, patients considering receiving implanted recording technologies will need to evaluate the risks and benefits of a BMI, as is the case for

all medical interventions. It is important for patients to have options, as each person has personal preferences involving willingness to undergo surgery, desire for functional restoration and outcome, and cosmesis—be it while deliberating cancer treatment or BMI treatment. BMIs based on different neural sensors (Figure 39–2) have different risks and benefits. Second, because BMIs can read out movement information from the brain at fine temporal resolution, it seems plausible that they will be able to read

out more personal and private types of information as well. Future neuroethics questions that may arise as the technology becomes more sophisticated include whether it is acceptable, even with patient consent, to read out memories that may otherwise be lost to Alzheimer disease; promote long-term memory consolidation by recording fleeting short-term memories and playing them back directly into the brain; read out subconscious fears or emotional states to assist desensitization psychotherapy; or read out potential intended movements, including speech, that would not naturally be enacted. Third, intracortical write-in BMIs, similar to DBS systems currently used to reduce tremor, may one day evoke naturalistic spatial-temporal activity patterns

across large populations of neurons. In the extreme it may not be possible for a person to distinguish self-produced and volitional neural activity patterns from artificial or surrogate patterns. Although there are numerous therapeutic and beneficial reasons for embracing this technology, such as reducing tremor or averting an epileptic seizure, more dubious uses can be envisioned such as commandeering a person's motor, sensory, decision making, or emotional valence circuits. Finally, ethical questions also involve the limits within which BMIs should operate. Current BMIs focus on restoring lost function, but it is possible for

BMIs to be made to enhance function beyond natural levels. This is as familiar as prescribing a pair of glasses that confer better than normal vision, or overprescribing a pain medication, which can cause euphoria that is often addictive. Should BMIs be allowed, if and when it becomes technically possible,

14/12/20 9:44 AM

to move a robotic arm faster and more accurately

than a native arm? Should continuous neural record

-

ings from BMIs, covering hours, days, or weeks, be

saved for future analysis, and are the security and privacy issues the same or different from personal genomics data? Should BMIs with preset content be available for purchase, for example, to skip a grade of mathematics in high school? Should an able-bodied person be able to elect to receive an implanted motor BMI? While the safe and ethical limits of such sen sory, motor, and cognitive BMI treatments might seem readily apparent, society continues to wrestle with these same questions concerning other currently available medical treatments. These include steroids that enhance musculature, energy drinks (eg, caffeine) that enhance alertness, and elective plastic surgery that alters appearance. Although many of these ideas and questions may appear far-fetched at present, as mechanisms of brain function and dysfunction continue to be revealed, BMI

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces


BMIs can help to regulate pathological neural

activity by measuring neural activity, processing

the neural activity, and subsequently stimulating

- neurons. Examples include deep brain stimulators and antiseizure systems. 6. Neural signals can be measured using different technologies, including electroencephalography, electrocorticography, and intracortical elec-
- -trodes. Intracortical electrodes record the activity of neurons near the electrode tip and can also be used to deliver electrical stimulation. 7. To study movement encoding, one usually considers the activity of an individual neuron across many experimental trials. In contrast, for
- movement decoding, one needs to consider the activity of many neurons across an individual experimental trial. 8. A discrete decoder estimates one of several possible movement goals from neural population activity. In contrast, a continuous decoder esti-

systems could build on these discoveries and create even more daunting ethical quandaries. But equally important is the immediate need to help people suffering from profound neurological disease and injury through restorative BMIs. In order to achieve the right balance, it is imperative that physicians, scientists, and engineers proceed in close conversation and partnership with ethicists, government oversight agencies, and patient advocacy groups. Highlights

1.

Brain–machine interfaces (BMIs) are medical

devices that read out and/or alter electrophysi-

ological activity at the level of populations of

- neurons. BMIs can help to restore lost sensory, motor, or brain processing capabilities, as well as regulate pathological neural activity. 2. BMIs can help to restore lost sensory capabilities by stimulating neurons to convey sensory information to the brain. Examples include cochlear
- implants to restore audition or retinal prostheses to restore vision. 3. BMIs can help to restore lost motor capabilities by measuring the activity from many individual neurons, converting this neural information into
- control signals, and guiding a paralyzed limb, robotic limb, or computer cursor. 4. Whereas motor BMIs aim to provide control of a robotic limb or paralyzed limb, communication BMIs aim to provide a fast and accurate interface
- with a computer or other electronic devices.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 971

- mates the moment-by-moment details of a movement from neural population activity. 9. The field is making substantial progress in increasing the performance of BMIs, measured in terms of the speed and accuracy of the estimated
- movements. It is now possible to move a computer cursor in a way that approaches the speed and accuracy of arm movements. 10. In addition to controlling computer cursors, BMIs can also guide a robotic limb or a paralyzed limb using functional electrical stimulation. Develop-
- ments from preclinical experiments with ablebodied, nonhuman primates have subsequently been tested in clinical trials with paralyzed people. 11. Future advances of BMI will depend, in part, on developments in neurotechnology. These include advances in hardware (eg, neural sensors and
- low-power electronics), software (eg, supervisory systems), and statistical methods (eg, decoding algorithms). 12. An important direction for improving BMI performance is to provide the user with additional forms of sensory feedback in addition to visual
- feedback. An area of current investigation uses stimulation of neurons to provide surrogate sensory feedback, representing somatosensation and proprioception, during ongoing use. 13. Beyond helping paralyzed patients and amputees, BMI is being increasingly used as a tool for understanding brain function. BMIs simplify the
- brain's input and output interfaces and allow the experimenter to define a causal relationship between neural activity and movement.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

5.


14.

Part V / Movement

BMIs raise new neuroethics questions, which

need to be considered together with the ben-

efits provided by BMIs to people with injury or

- disease.

Selected Reading

Andersen RA, Hwang EJ, Mulliken GH. 2010. Cognitive neu-

ral prosthetics. Annu Rev Psychol 61:169–190.

Donoghue JP, Nurmikko A, Black M, Hochberg LR. 2007.

- Assistive technology and robotic control using motor cortex ensemble-based neural interface systems in humans
- with tetraplegia. J Physiol 579:603–611. Fetz EE. 2007. Volitional control of neural activity: implications for brain-computer interfaces. J Physiol 579:571–579. Green AM, Kalaska JF. 2011. Learning to move machines
- with the mind. Trends Neurosci 34:61–75. Hatsopoulos NG, Donoghue JP. 2009. The science of neural
- interface systems. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:249–266. Kao JC, Stavisky SD, Sussillo D, Nuyujukian P, Shenoy KV.
2014. Information systems opportunities in brain-machine interface decoders. Proc IEEE 102:666–682.
- Nicolelis MAL, Lebedev MA. 2009. Principles of neural ensemble physiology underlying the operation of brainmachine interfaces. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:530–540.
- Schwartz AB. 2016. Movement: how the brain communicates with the world. Cell 164:1122–1135. Shenoy KV, Carmena JM. 2014. Combining decoder design
- and neural adaptation in brain-machine interfaces. Neuron 84:665–680.
- References

Aflalo T, Kellis S, Klaes C, et al. 2015. Decoding motor

imagery from the posterior parietal cortex of a tetraplegic

human. Science 348:906–910.

- Ajiboye AB, Willett FR, Young DR, et al. 2017. Restoration of reaching and grasping movements through brain-controlled muscle stimulation in a person with tetraplegia: a proof-
- of-concept demonstration. Lancet 389:1821–1830. Anumanchipalli GK, Chartier J, Chang EF. 2019. Speech synthesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences. Nature 568:493–498.
- Blabe CH, Gilja V, Chestek CA, Shenoy KV, Anderson KD, Henderson JM. 2015. Assessment of brain-machine interfaces from the perspective of people with paralysis. J Neural
- Eng 12:043002.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 972

Bouton CE, Shaikhouni A, Annetta NV, et al. 2016. Restoring

cortical control of functional movement in a human with

quadriplegia. Nature 533:247–250.

- Carmena JM, Lebedev MA, Crist RE, et al. 2003. Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates. PLoS Biol 1:E42.
- Chapin JK, Moxon KA, Markowitz RS, Nicolelis MA. 1999. Realtime control of a robot arm using simultaneously recorded neurons in the motor cortex. Nat Neurosci 2:664–670.
- Krishna V. Shenoy Byron M. Yu Collinger JL, Wodlinger B, Downey JE, et al. 2013. Highperformance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia. Lancet 381:557–564.
- Dadarlat MC, O'Dohert JE, Sabes PN. 2015. A learning-based approach to artificial sensory feedback leads to optimal integration. Nat Neurosci 18:138–144.
- Ethier C, Oby ER, Bauman MJ, Miller LE. 2012. Restoration of grasp following paralysis through brain-controlled stimulation of muscles. Nature 485:368–371.
- Fetz EE. 1969. Operant conditioning of cortical unit activity. Science 163:955–958. Flesher SN, Collinger JL, Foldes ST, et al. 2016. Intracortical
- microstimulation of human somatosensory cortex. Sci Transl Med 8:361ra141.
- Ganguly K, Carmena JM. 2009. Emergence of a stable cortical map for neuroprosthetic control. PLoS Biol 7:e1000153. Gilja V, Nuyujukian P, Chestek CA, et al. 2012. A high-
- performance neural prosthesis enabled by control algorithm design. Nat Neurosci 15:1752–1757.
- Gilja V, Pandarinath C, Blabe CH, et al. 2015. Clinical translation of a high-performance neural prosthesis. Nat Med 21:1142–1145.
- Golub MD, Chase SM, Batista AP, Yu BM. 2016. Braincomputer interfaces for dissecting cognitive processes underlying sensorimotor control. Curr Opin Neurobiol
- 37:53–58. Hochberg LR, Bacher D, Jarosiewicz B, et al. 2012. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm. Nature 485:372–375.
- Hochberg LR, Serruya MD, Friehs GM, et al. 2006. Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia. Nature 442:164–171.
- Humphrey DR, Schmidt EM, Thompson WD. 1970. Predicting measures of motor performance from multiple cortical spike trains. Science 170:758–762.
- Jackson A, Mavoori J, Fetz EE. 2006. Long-term motor cortex plasticity induced by an electronic neural implant. Nature 444:56–60.
- Jarosiewicz B, Sarma AA, Bacher D, et al. 2015. Virtual typing by people with tetraplegia using a self-calibrating intracortical brain-computer interface. Sci Transl Med
- 7:313ra179. Kennedy PR, Bakay RA. 1998. Restoration of neural output from a paralyzed patient by a direct brain connection. Neuroreport 9:1707–1711.
- Kim SP, Simeral JD, Hochberg LR, Donoghue JP, Black MJ. 2008. Neural control of computer cursor velocity by decoding motor cortical spiking activity in humans with
- tetraplegia. J Neural Eng 5:455–476.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

Koralek AC, Costa RM, Carmena JM. 2013. Temporally pre-

cise cell-specific coherence develops in corticostriatal net-

works during learning. Neuron 79:865–872.

- McFarland DJ, Sarnacki WA, Wolpaw JR. 2010. Electroencephalographic (EEG) control of three-dimensional movement. J Neural Eng 7:036007.
- Moritz CT, Perlmutter SI, Fetz EE. 2008. Direct control of paralysed muscles by cortical neurons. Nature 456:639–642. Musallam S, Corneil BD, Greger B, Scherberger H, Andersen
- RA. 2004. Cognitive control signals for neural prosthetics. Science 305:258–262.
- O'Doherty JE, Lebedev MA, Ifft PJ, et al. 2011. Active tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface. Nature 479:228–231.
- Pandarinath C, Nuyujukian P, Blabe CH, et al. 2017. High performance communication by people with paralysis using an intracortical brain-computer interface. eLife
- 6:e18554. Sadtler PT, Quick KM, Golub MD, et al. 2014. Neural constraints on learning. Nature 512:423–426. Santhanam G, Ryu SI, Yu BM, Afshar A, Shenoy KV. 2006.
- A high-performance brain-computer interface. Nature 442:195–198.
- Schalk G, Miller KJ, Anderson NR, et al. 2008. Two-dimensional movement control using electrocorticographic signals in humans. J Neural Eng 5:75–84.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 973

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces


Serruya MD, Hatsopoulos NG, Paninski L, Fellows MR,

Donoghue JP. 2002. Instant neural control of a movement

signal. Nature 416:141–142.

- Shenoy KV, Meeker D, Cao S, et al. 2003. Neural prosthetic control signals from plan activity. Neuroreport 14:591–596. Stavisky SD, Willett FR, Wilson GH, Murphy BA, Rezaii P,
- Avansino DT, et al. 2019. Neural ensemble dynamics in dorsal motor cortex during speech in people with paraly-
- sis. eLife;8:e46015. Suminski AJ, Tkach DC, Fagg AH, Hatsopoulos NG. 2010. Incorporating feedback from multiple sensory modalities enhances brain-machine interface control. J Neurosci
- 30:16777–16787. Taylor DM, Tillery SIH, Schwartz AB. 2002. Direct cortical control of 3d neuroprosthetic devices. Science 296:1829–1832. Velliste M, Perel S, Spalding MC, Whitford AS, Schwartz AB.
2008. Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding. Nature 453:1098–1101.
- Wessberg J, Stambaugh CR, Kralik JD, et al. 2000. Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates. Nature 408:361–365.
- Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Tyler-Kabara EC, Schwartz AB, Boninger ML, Collinger JL. 2015. Ten-dimensional anthropomorphic arm control in a human brain-machine inter-
- face: difficulties, solutions, and limitations. J Neural Eng 12:016011.

14/12/20 9:44 AM
Koralek AC, Costa RM, Carmena JM. 2013. Temporally pre-

cise cell-specific coherence develops in corticostriatal net-

works during learning. Neuron 79:865–872.

- McFarland DJ, Sarnacki WA, Wolpaw JR. 2010. Electroencephalographic (EEG) control of three-dimensional movement. J Neural Eng 7:036007.
- Moritz CT, Perlmutter SI, Fetz EE. 2008. Direct control of paralysed muscles by cortical neurons. Nature 456:639–642. Musallam S, Corneil BD, Greger B, Scherberger H, Andersen
- RA. 2004. Cognitive control signals for neural prosthetics. Science 305:258–262.
- O'Doherty JE, Lebedev MA, Ifft PJ, et al. 2011. Active tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface. Nature 479:228–231.
- Pandarinath C, Nuyujukian P, Blabe CH, et al. 2017. High performance communication by people with paralysis using an intracortical brain-computer interface. eLife
- 6:e18554. Sadtler PT, Quick KM, Golub MD, et al. 2014. Neural constraints on learning. Nature 512:423–426. Santhanam G, Ryu SI, Yu BM, Afshar A, Shenoy KV. 2006.
- A high-performance brain-computer interface. Nature 442:195–198.
- Schalk G, Miller KJ, Anderson NR, et al. 2008. Two-dimensional movement control using electrocorticographic signals in humans. J Neural Eng 5:75–84.

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 973

Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces


Serruya MD, Hatsopoulos NG, Paninski L, Fellows MR,

Donoghue JP. 2002. Instant neural control of a movement

signal. Nature 416:141–142.

- Shenoy KV, Meeker D, Cao S, et al. 2003. Neural prosthetic control signals from plan activity. Neuroreport 14:591–596. Stavisky SD, Willett FR, Wilson GH, Murphy BA, Rezaii P,
- Avansino DT, et al. 2019. Neural ensemble dynamics in dorsal motor cortex during speech in people with paraly-
- sis. eLife;8:e46015. Suminski AJ, Tkach DC, Fagg AH, Hatsopoulos NG. 2010. Incorporating feedback from multiple sensory modalities enhances brain-machine interface control. J Neurosci
- 30:16777–16787. Taylor DM, Tillery SIH, Schwartz AB. 2002. Direct cortical control of 3d neuroprosthetic devices. Science 296:1829–1832. Velliste M, Perel S, Spalding MC, Whitford AS, Schwartz AB.
2008. Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding. Nature 453:1098–1101.
- Wessberg J, Stambaugh CR, Kralik JD, et al. 2000. Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates. Nature 408:361–365.
- Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Tyler-Kabara EC, Schwartz AB, Boninger ML, Collinger JL. 2015. Ten-dimensional anthropomorphic arm control in a human brain-machine inter-
- face: difficulties, solutions, and limitations. J Neural Eng 12:016011.

14/12/20 9:44 AM

Kandel-Ch39\_0953-0974.indd 974


14/12/20 9:44 AM

Part VI

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 975

12/12/20 3:23 PM

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 976

Preceding Page

Embracing couple mourning someone's death, perhaps buried in a nearby funerary urn.

(Mali, Djenné style. Inland Delta of the Niger River, 13th–15th centuries AD. University

of Iowa Stanley Museum of Art, The Stanley Collection of African Art. X1986.451.)

12/12/20 3:23 PM


<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 977

The Biology of Emotion,

## Motivation, and Homeostasis

E

motional and homeostatic behaviors all involve  the

coordination of one or more somatic, autonomic, hormonal, or

cognitive processes. Subcortical brain regions concerned with a

range of functions—including feeding, drinking, heart rate, breathing, temperature regulation, sleep, sex, and facial expressions—play a critical role in this coordination. Subcortical brain regions are bidirectionally connected with cortical brain areas, providing a means for reperesentations of internal state variables (eg, visceral information) to influence cognitive operations, such as subjective feelings, decision-making, and attention, and for cognitive functions to regulate or extinguish neural representations in subcortical brain areas that help coordinate behavior reflecting emotional states. Our consideration of these systems begins with the brain stem, a structure critical for wakefulness and conscious attention on the one hand and sleep on the other. The significance of this small region of

the brain—located between the spinal cord and the diencephalon—is disproportionate to its size. Damage to the brain stem can profoundly affect motor and sensory processes because it contains all of the ascending tracts that bring sensory information from the surface of the body to the cerebral cortex and all of the descending tracts from the cerebral cortex that deliver motor commands to the spinal cord. Finally, the brain stem contains neurons that control respiration and heartbeat as well as nuclei that give rise to most of the cranial nerves that innervate the head and neck. Six neurochemical modulatory systems in the brain stem modulate sensory, motor, and arousal systems. The dopaminergic pathways that connect the midbrain to the limbic system and cortex are

particularly important, because they are involved in processing stimuli and events in relation to reinforcement expectation, and therefore contribute to motivational state and learning. Addictive drugs such as nicotine, alcohol, opiates, and cocaine are thought to produce their actions by co-opting the same neural pathways that positively reinforce behaviors essential for survival. Other modulatory transmitters

12/12/20 3:23 PM

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 978

regulate sleep and wakefulness, in part by controlling information

flow between the thalamus and cortex. Disorders of electrical excita

-

tion in corticothalamic circuits can result in seizures and epilepsy.

Rostral to the brain stem lies the hypothalamus, which functions to maintain the stability of the internal environment by keeping physiological variables within the limits favorable to vital bodily

processes. Homeostatic processes in the nervous system have profound consequences for behavior that have intrigued many of the founders of modern physiology, including Claude Bernard, Walter B. Cannon, and Walter Hess. Neurons controlling the internal environment are concentrated in the hypothalamus, a small area of the diencephalon that comprises less than 1% of the total brain volume. The hypothalamus, with closely linked structures in the brain stem and limbic system, acts directly on the internal environment, through its control of the endocrine system and autonomic nervous system, to achieve goal-directed behavior. It acts indirectly through its connections to higher brain regions to modulate emotional and motivational states. In addition to influencing motivated behaviors, the hypothalamus, together with the brain stem below and the cerebral cortex above, maintains a general state of arousal, which ranges from excitement and vigilance to drowsiness and stupor. The neurobiological investigation of emotion has relied on experiments that define emotions in terms of specific measures ranging from subjective reports of feelings in humans, to approach or defen-

sive behaviors, to physiological responses such as autonomic reactivity. Charles Darwin observed in his seminal book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals that many emotions are conserved across species, making clear the relevance of studying emotions by using animal models to probe neural mechansisms. In experimental frameworks, emotional states are thereby considered to be central brain states that can cause coordinated behavioral, physiological, and cognitive responses across species. In recent years, much work on emotion has focused on the amygdala, which can orchestrate different responses via its connections to the cortex, hypothalamus, and brain stem. Lesions of the amygdala

in humans impair fear learning and expression, as well as fear recognition in others, due to decreased allocation of attention to features of faces that communicate fear. Symptoms in a variety of psychiatric disorders—ranging from addiction to anxiety to social deficits— likely involve amygdala dysfunction. However, the amygdala is only one component of a larger set of brain regions that includes parts of the hypothalamus, the brain stem, and cortical areas also responsible for coordinating emotional responses. In particular, the medial and ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala are closely interconnected. Dynamic processing within and between these structures likely subserves many functions beyond coordinated emotional behavior, including extinction, the cognitive regulation of emotional

12/12/20 3:23 PM

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 979

states, interactions between social and emotional domains, and the

influence of the amgydalar representations on decision-making and

subjective feelings.

Part Editors: C. Daniel Salzman and John D. Koester

Part VI

Chapter 40

The Brain Stem

| Chapter 41  The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and  Behavioral Control of Survival  Chapter 42  Emotion  Chapter 43  Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States  Chapter 44  Sleep and Wakefulness   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

12/12/20 3:23 PM

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 980


12/12/20 3:23 PM


The Brain Stem

The Cranial Nerves Are Homologous to the Spinal Nerves

Cranial Nerves Mediate the Sensory and Motor

Functions of the Face and Head and the Autonomic

## Functions of the Body

Cranial Nerves Leave the Skull in Groups and Often Are Injured Together The Organization of the Cranial Nerve Nuclei Follows the

Same Basic Plan as the Sensory and Motor Areas of the Spinal Cord

## Embryonic Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a Segmental Organization Adult Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a

Columnar Organization The Organization of the Brain Stem Differs From the

Spinal Cord in Three Important Ways Neuronal Ensembles in the Brain Stem Reticular Formation

Coordinate Reflexes and Simple Behaviors Necessary for Homeostasis and Survival

## Cranial Nerve Reflexes Involve Mono- and Polysynaptic Brain Stem Relays Pattern Generators Coordinate More Complex

Stereotypic Behaviors Control of Breathing Provides an Example of How

Pattern Generators Are Integrated Into More Complex Behaviors

Monoaminergic Neurons in the Brain Stem Modulate Sensory, Motor, Autonomic, and Behavioral Functions Many Modulatory Systems Use Monoamines as

## Neurotransmitters Monoaminergic Neurons Share Many

Cellular Properties Autonomic Regulation and Breathing Are Modulated by

Monoaminergic Pathways

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 981

Pain Perception Is Modulated by

Monoamine Antinociceptive Pathways

Motor Activity Is Facilitated by

Monoaminergic Pathways Ascending Monoaminergic Projections Modulate

Forebrain Systems for Motivation and Reward Monoaminergic and Cholinergic Neurons Maintain

Arousal by Modulating Forebrain Neurons Highlights


n primitive vertebrates—reptiles

,

amphibians,

and fish—the forebrain is only a small part of the

brain and is devoted mainly to olfactory process-

ing and to the integration of autonomic and endocrine function with the basic behaviors necessary for survival. These basic behaviors include feeding, drinking, sexual reproduction, sleep, and emergency responses. Although we are accustomed to thinking that the forebrain orchestrates most human behaviors, many complex responses, such as feeding—the coordination of chewing, licking, and swallowing—are actually made up of relatively simple, stereotypic motor responses governed by ensembles of neurons in the brain stem. The importance of this pattern of organization in human behavior is clear from observing infants born without a forebrain (hydranencephaly). Hydranence-

phalic infants are surprisingly difficult to distinguish from normal babies. They cry, smile, suckle, and move their eyes, face, arms, and legs. As these sad cases illustrate, the brain stem can organize virtually all of the behavior of the newborn.

12/12/20 3:23 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

In this chapter, we describe the functional anat-

omy of the brain stem, particularly the cranial nerves,

as well as the ensembles of local circuit neurons that

organize the simple behaviors of the face and head. Finally, we consider the modulatory functions of nuclei in the brain stem that adjust the sensitivity of sensory, motor, and arousal systems. The brain stem is the rostral continuation of the spinal cord, and its motor and sensory components are similar in structure to those of the spinal cord. But

the portions of the brain stem that control the cranial nerves are much more complex than the corresponding parts of the spinal cord that control the spinal nerves because cranial nerves mediate more complex behaviors. The core of the brain stem, the reticular formation, is homologous to the intermediate gray matter of the spinal cord but is also more complex. Like the spinal cord, the reticular formation contains ensembles of local-circuit interneurons that generate motor and autonomic patterns and coordinate reflexes and simple behaviors. In addition, the brain stem contains glutamatergic and GABAergic circuitry that regulates arousal, wake–sleep cycles, breathing, and other vital functions, as well as monoaminergic modulatory neurons that act to optimize the functions of the nervous system. The Cranial Nerves Are Homologous to the

Spinal Nerves

## Because the spinal nerves reach only as high as the first cervical vertebra, the cranial nerves provide the

somatic and visceral, sensory and motor innervation

for the head. Two cranial nerves, the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, also supply visceral sensory and motor innervation of the neck, chest, and most of the abdominal organs with the exception of the pelvis. In addition, some cranial nerves are associated with specialized functions, such as vision or hearing, that go beyond the sensory and motor plan of the spinal cord. Assessment of the cranial nerves is an important part of the neurological examination because abnormalities of function can pinpoint a site in the brain

stem that has been damaged. Therefore, it is important to know the origins of the cranial nerves, their intracranial course, and where they exit from the skull. The cranial nerves are traditionally numbered I through XII in rostrocaudal sequence. Cranial nerves I and II enter at the base of the forebrain. The other The exception is the trochlear (IV) nerve, which leaves the midbrain from its dorsal surface just behind the inferior colliculus and wraps around the lateral surface of the brain stem to join the other cranial nerves concerned with eye movements. The cranial nerves with sensory functions (V, VII, VIII, IX, and X) have associated sensory ganglia that operate much as dorsal root ganglia do for spinal nerves. These ganglia are located along the course of individual nerves as they enter the skull. The olfactory (I) nerve, which is associated with the forebrain, is described in detail in Chapter 29; the optic (II) nerve, which is associated with the dienceph- alon, is described in Chapters 21 and 22. The spinal accessory (XI) nerve can be considered a cranial nerve anatomically but actually is a spinal nerve originating from the higher cervical motor rootlets. It runs up into the skull before exiting through the jugular foramen to innervate the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles in the neck. Cranial Nerves Mediate the Sensory and Motor Functions of the Face and Head and the Autonomic Functions of the Body

## Three ocular motor nerves control movements of the eyes. The abducens (VI) nerve has the simplest action; it contracts the lateral rectus muscle to move the globe

laterally. The trochlear (IV) nerve also innervates a single muscle, the superior oblique, which both depresses the eye and rotates it inward depending on the eye's position. The oculomotor (III) nerve supplies all of the other muscles of the orbit, including the retractor of the lid. It also provides the parasympathetic innervation responsible for pupillary constriction in response to light and accommodation of the lens for near vision. The ocular motor system is considered in detail in Chapter 35. The trigeminal (V) nerve is a mixed nerve (containing both sensory and motor axons) that leaves the brain stem in two roots. The motor root innervates the

muscles of mastication (the masseter, temporalis, and pterygoids) and a few muscles of the palate (tensor veli palatini), inner ear (tensor tympani), and upper neck (mylohyoid and anterior belly of the digastric muscle). The sensory fibers arise from neurons in the trigeminal ganglion, located at the floor of the skull in the middle cranial fossa. Three branches emerge from the trigeminal ganglion. The ophthalmic division (V 1 ) runs with the ocular motor nerves through the superior orbital fissure

-(Figure 40–2A) to innervate the orbit, nose, and forehead and scalp back to the vertex of the skull (Figure 40–3). Some fibers from this division also innervate

12/12/20 3:23 PM

cranial nerves arise from the brain stem at character istic locations (Figure 40–1). All but one exit from the ventral surface of the brain stem (Figure 40–2).

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 982
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

In this chapter, we describe the functional anat-

omy of the brain stem, particularly the cranial nerves,

as well as the ensembles of local circuit neurons that

organize the simple behaviors of the face and head. Finally, we consider the modulatory functions of nuclei in the brain stem that adjust the sensitivity of sensory, motor, and arousal systems. The brain stem is the rostral continuation of the spinal cord, and its motor and sensory components are similar in structure to those of the spinal cord. But

the portions of the brain stem that control the cranial nerves are much more complex than the corresponding parts of the spinal cord that control the spinal nerves because cranial nerves mediate more complex behaviors. The core of the brain stem, the reticular formation, is homologous to the intermediate gray matter of the spinal cord but is also more complex. Like the spinal cord, the reticular formation contains ensembles of local-circuit interneurons that generate motor and autonomic patterns and coordinate reflexes and simple behaviors. In addition, the brain stem contains glutamatergic and GABAergic circuitry that regulates arousal, wake–sleep cycles, breathing, and other vital functions, as well as monoaminergic modulatory neurons that act to optimize the functions of the nervous system. The Cranial Nerves Are Homologous to the

Spinal Nerves

## Because the spinal nerves reach only as high as the first cervical vertebra, the cranial nerves provide the

somatic and visceral, sensory and motor innervation

for the head. Two cranial nerves, the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, also supply visceral sensory and motor innervation of the neck, chest, and most of the abdominal organs with the exception of the pelvis. In addition, some cranial nerves are associated with specialized functions, such as vision or hearing, that go beyond the sensory and motor plan of the spinal cord. Assessment of the cranial nerves is an important part of the neurological examination because abnormalities of function can pinpoint a site in the brain

stem that has been damaged. Therefore, it is important to know the origins of the cranial nerves, their intracranial course, and where they exit from the skull. The cranial nerves are traditionally numbered I through XII in rostrocaudal sequence. Cranial nerves I and II enter at the base of the forebrain. The other The exception is the trochlear (IV) nerve, which leaves the midbrain from its dorsal surface just behind the inferior colliculus and wraps around the lateral surface of the brain stem to join the other cranial nerves concerned with eye movements. The cranial nerves with sensory functions (V, VII, VIII, IX, and X) have associated sensory ganglia that operate much as dorsal root ganglia do for spinal nerves. These ganglia are located along the course of individual nerves as they enter the skull. The olfactory (I) nerve, which is associated with the forebrain, is described in detail in Chapter 29; the optic (II) nerve, which is associated with the dienceph- alon, is described in Chapters 21 and 22. The spinal accessory (XI) nerve can be considered a cranial nerve anatomically but actually is a spinal nerve originating from the higher cervical motor rootlets. It runs up into the skull before exiting through the jugular foramen to innervate the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles in the neck. Cranial Nerves Mediate the Sensory and Motor Functions of the Face and Head and the Autonomic Functions of the Body

## Three ocular motor nerves control movements of the eyes. The abducens (VI) nerve has the simplest action; it contracts the lateral rectus muscle to move the globe

laterally. The trochlear (IV) nerve also innervates a single muscle, the superior oblique, which both depresses the eye and rotates it inward depending on the eye's position. The oculomotor (III) nerve supplies all of the other muscles of the orbit, including the retractor of the lid. It also provides the parasympathetic innervation responsible for pupillary constriction in response to light and accommodation of the lens for near vision. The ocular motor system is considered in detail in Chapter 35. The trigeminal (V) nerve is a mixed nerve (containing both sensory and motor axons) that leaves the brain stem in two roots. The motor root innervates the

muscles of mastication (the masseter, temporalis, and pterygoids) and a few muscles of the palate (tensor veli palatini), inner ear (tensor tympani), and upper neck (mylohyoid and anterior belly of the digastric muscle). The sensory fibers arise from neurons in the trigeminal ganglion, located at the floor of the skull in the middle cranial fossa. Three branches emerge from the trigeminal ganglion. The ophthalmic division (V 1 ) runs with the ocular motor nerves through the superior orbital fissure

-(Figure 40–2A) to innervate the orbit, nose, and forehead and scalp back to the vertex of the skull (Figure 40–3). Some fibers from this division also innervate

12/12/20 3:23 PM

cranial nerves arise from the brain stem at character istic locations (Figure 40–1). All but one exit from the ventral surface of the brain stem (Figure 40–2).

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 982

not shown because it terminates in the olfactory bulb in the Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


Lateral geniculate

Inferior colliculus

Basis pedunculi

Cerebellar peduncles:

Vestibulocochlear

nerve (VIII)

Glossopharyngeal

(IX) and vagus

nerves (X)

Accessory

the meninges and blood vessels of the anterior and

<!-- image -->

middle intracranial fossas. The maxillary division (V


)

runs through the round foramen of the sphenoid bone from the dorsal surface of the midbrain.

muscle in the upper neck. The sensory root runs as a

separate bundle, the intermediate nerve, through the

internal auditory canal and arises from neurons in

to innervate the skin over the cheek and the upper portion of the oral cavity. The mandibular division (V which also contains the motor axons of the trigeminal nerve, leaves the skull through the oval foramen of the sphenoid bone. It innervates the skin over the jaw, the area above the ear, and the lower part of the oral cavity, including the tongue. Complete trigeminal sensory loss results in numbness of the entire face and the inside of the mouth. One-sided trigeminal motor weakness does not cause

much weakness of jaw closure because the muscles of mastication on either side are sufficient to close the jaw. Nevertheless, the jaw tends to deviate toward the side of the lesion when the mouth is opened because the internal pterygoid muscle on the opposite side, when unopposed, pulls the jaw toward the weak side. The facial (VII) nerve is also a mixed nerve. Its motor root innervates the muscles of facial expression as well as the stapedius muscle in the inner ear,

3 ), the geniculate ganglion, located near the middle ear. Distal to the geniculate ganglion, the sensory fibers diverge from the motor branch. Some innervate skin of the external auditory canal while others form the chorda tympani, which joins the lingual nerve and conveys taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The autonomic component of the facial nerve includes parasympathetic fibers that travel through the motor root to the sphenopalatine and submandibular ganglia, which innervate lacrimal and salivary glands (except the parotid gland) and the cerebral vasculature. The facial nerve may suffer isolated injury in Bell palsy, a common complication of certain viral infections. Early on, the patient may complain mainly of

stylohyoid muscle, and posterior belly of the digastric

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 983

the face pulling toward the unaffected side because of the weakness of the muscles on the side of the lesion. Later, the ipsilateral corner of the mouth droops, food falls out of the mouth, and the eyelids no longer close on that side. Loss of blinking may result in drying

12/12/20 3:23 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A

<!-- image -->

B

Anterior

cranial Trigeminal nerve (V) divisions Optic foramen Superior orbital ssure

<!-- image -->

A. Cranial nerves II, III, IV, V, and VI exit the skull near the pitui-

tary fossa. The optic (II) nerve enters the optic foramen, but the oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV), and abducens (VI) nerves,

and the first division of the trigeminal (V) nerve leave through the superior orbital fissure. The second and third divisions of and injury to the cornea. The patient may complain that sound has a booming quality in the ipsilateral ear

because the stapedius muscle fails to tense the ossi-

cles in response to a loud sound (the stapedial reflex). Taste may also be lost on the anterior two-thirds of the tongue on the ipsilateral side. If the Bell palsy is caused by a herpes zoster infection of the geniculate ganglion, small blisters may form in the outer ear canal, the ganglion's cutaneous sensory field.

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 984

Petrous

temporal

bone

Lateral sinus

the trigeminal nerve exit through the round and oval foramina,

B. In the posterior fossa, the facial (VII) and vestibulocochlear

(VIII) nerves exit through the internal auditory canal, whereas the glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), and accessory (XI) nerves

leave through the jugular foramen. The hypoglossal nerve (XII) has its own foramen. The vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerve contains two main

bundles of sensory axons from two ganglia. Fibers from

the vestibular ganglion relay sensation of angular

and linear acceleration from the semicircular canals, utricle, and saccule in the inner ear. Fibers from the cochlear ganglion relay information from the cochlea concerning sound. A vestibular schwannoma, one of the most common intracranial tumors, may form along the vestibular component of cranial nerve VIII

12/12/20 3:23 PM

Dorsum sellae Vertex Ophthalmic division (V


)

Maxillary

division (V2)

Mandibular

division (V3)

Figure 40–3 The three sensory divisions of the trigeminal


and V



sions also innervate the upper and lower parts of the oral Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


multiple postprandial functions. One excellent exam-

ple is the role of vagal afferents in regulating food

intake following a meal. Cholecystokinin (CCK) is an

cavity, including the tongue. The C2 cervical root innervates the back of the head. The area around the ear is innervated by branches of the VII and X nerve. as it runs within the internal auditory meatus. Most

<!-- image -->

-endogenous peptide secreted by duodenal enteroendocrine cells during meals, which helps to induce satiety. CCK acts (at least in part) via action on vagal afferents in the gut, stimulating a feeling of fullness. Exogenous electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve is now being used clinically to treat a wide variety of conditions including obesity, intractable epilepsy, and even depression. However, the neuroanatomic and molecular mechanisms underlying these effects remain poorly understood. Similarly, bariatric surgery remains one of the most widely used and effective strategies to combat obesity. Some studies have suggested that surgical alterations in the responsiveness of vagal afferents to gut signals may contribute to the sustained weight loss following these surgeries. Because many of the functions of nerves IX and X are bilateral and partially overlapping, unilateral injury of nerve IX may be difficult to detect. Patients with uni-

patients complain only about hearing loss, as the brain

is usually able to adapt to the gradual loss of vestibular lateral cranial nerve X injury are hoarse, because one vocal cord is paralyzed, and they may have some difficulty swallowing. Examination of the oropharynx shows weakness and numbness of the palate on one side. The spinal accessory (XI) nerve is purely motor and originates from motor neurons in the upper cervical spinal cord. It innervates the trapezius and sterno-

input from one side. The glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve and vagus (X) nerve are mixed nerves and provide parasympathetic autonomic input to thoracic and visceral organs. These

closely related nerves transmit sensory information from the pharynx and upper airway as well as taste from the posterior third of the tongue and oral cavity. The glossopharyngeal nerve transmits visceral information from the neck (for example, information on blood oxygen and carbon dioxide from the carotid body, and arterial pressure from the carotid sinus), whereas the vagus nerve transmits visceral information from the thoracic and abdominal organs except for the distal colon and pelvic organs. Both nerves include parasympathetic motor fibers. The glossopharyngeal nerve provides parasympathetic control of the parotid salivary gland, whereas the vagus nerve innervates the rest of the internal organs of the neck, thorax, and abdomen. The glossopharyngeal nerve innervates only one muscle of the palate, the stylopharyngeus, which raises and dilates the pharynx. The remaining striated muscles of the larynx and pharynx are under control of the vagus nerve. The vagal sensory neurons innervate the length of the gastrointestinal tract and thus are able to regulate

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 985

cleidomastoid muscles on the same side of the body. Because the mechanical effect of the sternocleidomas -toid is to turn the head toward the opposite side, an injury of the left nerve causes weakness in turning the head to the right. A lesion of the cerebral cortex on the left will cause weakness of voluntary muscles on the entire right side of the body except for the sternocleidomastoid; instead, the ipsilateral sternocleidomastoid will be weak (because the left cerebral cortex is concerned with muscles that interact with the right side of the world, and the left sternocleidomastoid turns the head to the right). The hypoglossal (XII) nerve is also purely motor, innervating the muscles of the tongue. When the nerve is injured, for example during surgery for head and

neck cancer, the tongue atrophies on that side. The muscle fibers exhibit twitches of muscle fascicles (fasciculations), which may be seen clearly through the thin mucosa of the tongue. Cranial Nerves Leave the Skull in Groups and Often Are Injured Together

## In assessing dysfunction of the cranial nerves, it is important to determine whether the injury is within

12/12/20 3:23 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

the brain or further along the course of the nerve. As

cranial nerves leave the skull in groups through spe-

cific foramina, damage at these locations can affect plates by the sulcus limitans, a longitudinal groove along the lateral walls of the central canal, fourth ventri- cle, and cerebral aqueduct (Figure 40–4). The alar plate

several nerves. The cranial nerves concerned with orbital sen sation and movement of the eyes—the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves, as well as the ophthal-

mic division of the trigeminal nerve—are gathered together in the cavernous sinus, along the lateral margins of the sella turcica, and then exit the skull through the superior orbital fissure adjacent to the optic foramen (Figure 40–2A). Tumors in this region, such as those arising from the pituitary gland, often make their presence known first by pressure on these nerves or the adjacent optic chiasm. Cranial nerves VII and VIII exit the brain stem at the cerebellopontine angle, the lateral corner of the brain stem at the juncture of the pons, medulla, and cerebel-

lum (Figure 40–2B), and then leave the skull through the internal auditory meatus. A common tumor of the cerebellopontine angle is the vestibular schwannoma (sometimes erroneously called an "acoustic neuroma"), which derives from Schwann cells in the vestibular component of nerve VIII. A large tumor of the cerebellopontine angle may not only impair the function of nerves VII and VIII but may also press on nerve V near its site of emergence from the middle cerebellar peduncle, causing facial numbness, or compress the cerebellum or its peduncles on the same side, causing ipsilateral clumsiness. The lower cranial nerves (IX, X, and XI) exit through the jugular foramen (Figure 40–2B) and are vulnerable to compression by tumors at that site. Nerve XII leaves

the skull through its own (hypoglossal) foramen and is generally not affected by tumors located in the adjacent jugular foramen, unless the tumor becomes quite large. If a tumor involves nerves IX and X, but nerve XI is spared, it is generally within or near the brain stem rather than near the jugular foramen. The Organization of the Cranial Nerve Nuclei

Follows the Same Basic Plan as the Sensory and

Motor Areas of the Spinal Cord Alar plate Sulcus limitans General and special Vestibular nucleus (N. VIII)

A. The neural tube is divided into a dorsal sensory portion (the

<!-- image -->

## Cranial nerve nuclei are organized in rostrocaudal columns that are homologous to the sensory and motor

alar plate) and a ventral motor portion (the basal plate) by a longitudinal groove, the sulcus limitans.

laminae of the spinal cord (Chapters 18 and 31). This

pattern is best understood from the developmental plan of the caudal neural tube that gives rise to the brain stem and spinal cord. The transverse axis of the embryonic caudal neural tube is subdivided into alar (dorsal) and basal (ventral)

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 986

B–D. During development, the sensory and motor cell groups migrate into their adult positions but largely retain their relative locations. In maturity (part D), the sulcus limitans (dashed line)

is still recognizable in the walls of the fourth ventricle and the cerebral aqueduct, demarcating the border between dorsal sensory (orange) and ventral motor (green) structures. The section in part D is from the rostral medulla.

-forms the sensory components of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, whereas the basal plate forms the motor components of the ventral horn. The intermediate gray matter is made up primarily of the interneurons that coordinate spinal reflexes and motor responses. The brain stem shares this basic plan. As the central canal of the spinal cord opens into the fourth ventricle, the walls of the neural tube are splayed outward

A

12/12/20 3:23 PM

so that the dorsal sensory structures (derived from the

alar plate) are displaced laterally, whereas the ventral

motor structures (derived from the basal plate) remain

more medial. The nuclei of the brain stem are divided into general nuclei, which serve functions similar to those of the spinal cord laminae, and special nuclei which serve functions unique to the head, such as hearing, balance, taste, and control of the musculature related to the jaw, face, oropharynx, and larynx. Embryonic Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a Segmental Organization Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem Adult Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a Columnar Organization

## Overall, the brain stem nuclei on each side are organized in six rostrocaudal columns, three of sensory

nuclei and three of motor nuclei (Figure 40–6). These

are considered later, in dorsolateral to ventromedial sequence. Although the columns are discontinuous along the rostrocaudal axis of the brain stem, nuclei with similar functions (sensory or motor, somatic or visceral) have similar dorsolateral-ventromedial positions at each level of the brain stem. Within each motor nucleus, motor neurons for an individual muscle are also arranged in a cigar-shaped longitudinal column. Thus, each motor nucleus in ,

## Although the columns of sensory and motor nuclei in the adult hindbrain are organized rostrocaudally, the

arrangement of neurons at each level derives from

a strikingly segmental pattern in the early embryo. Before neurons appear, the future hindbrain region of the neural plate becomes subdivided into a series of eight segments of approximately equal size, known as rhombomeres (Figure 40–5A). Each rhombomere develops a similar set of differentiated neurons, as if the developing hindbrain is made up of series of modules. Pairs of rhombomeres

are associated with specific sets of muscles derived from the embryonic branchial arches (eg, rhombomeres 2 and 3 with the muscles of mastication and 4 and 5 with the muscles of facial expression) (Figure 40–5A). The even-numbered rhombomeres differentiate ahead of the odd-numbered ones. Rhombomeres 2, 4, and 6 form the branchial motor nuclei of the trigeminal, facial, and glossopharyngeal nerves, respectively. Later, rhombomeres 3, 5, and 7 contribute motor neurons to these nuclei, again respectively; in each case, the axons of individual motor neurons from oddnumbered rhombomeres extend rostrally as they join those of their even-numbered neighbors. At this developmental stage, each of these nuclei is composed of homologous neurons derived from two adjacent segments. This early transverse seg-

mental organization changes later in development, as rhombomere boundaries disappear and the dorsolateral migration of the cell bodies aligns the cells into rostrocaudal columns. Ultimately, some somatic and parasympathetic motor neurons migrate into the ventrolateral tegmentum; for example, the migration of the facial motor neurons of rhombomere 4 around the abducens nucleus generates the internal genu of the facial nerve (Figure 40–5A). Furthermore, neural crest cells from each rhombomere migrate into the corresponding branchial arches where they provide sensory and autonomic ganglion cells, as well as positional cues for the development of the arch muscles.

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 987

cross section forms a mosaic map of the territory that is innervated. For example, in a cross section through the facial nucleus, the clusters of neurons that innervate the different facial muscles form a topographic map of the face. General Somatic Sensory Column

The general somatic sensory column occupies the most

## lateral region of the alar plate and includes the trigemi-

nal sensory nuclei (N. V). The spinal trigeminal nucleus

is a continuation of the dorsal-most laminae of the spinal dorsal horn (Figure 40–5A) and is sometimes called the medullary dorsal horn. Along its outer surface lies the spinal trigeminal tract, a direct continuation of Lissauer's tract of the spinal cord (Chapter 20), thus allowing some cervical sensory fibers to reach the trigeminal nuclei and some trigeminal sensory axons to reach the dorsal horn in upper cervical segments. This arrangement allows dorsal horn sensory neurons to have a range of inputs that are much broader than that of individual spinal or trigeminal segments and ensures the integration of trigeminal and upper cervical sensory maps. The spinal trigeminal nucleus receives sensory axons from the trigeminal ganglion (N. V) and from all cranial nerve sensory ganglia concerned with pain

and temperature in the head, including geniculate ganglion (N. VII) neurons that relay information from the external auditory meatus, petrosal ganglion (N. IX) cells that convey information from the posterior part of the palate and tonsillar fossa, and nodose ganglion (N. X) axons that relay information from the posterior wall of the pharynx. The spinal trigeminal nucleus thus represents the entire oral cavity as well as the surface of the face. The somatotopic organization of the afferent fibers in the spinal trigeminal nucleus is inverted: The forehead

12/12/20 3:23 PM



A

Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

B

<!-- image -->

Somatic

motor nuclei Visceral motor nuclei N. V

<!-- image -->

N. VII

2nd arch

3rd arch

A. In the developing hindbrain (seen here from the ventral side),

special and general visceral motor neurons (represented on the right side of the brain stem) form in each hindbrain segment

(rhombomere) except rhombomere 1 (r1). Each special visceral motor nucleus comprises neurons in two rhombomeres: the trigeminal motor nucleus is formed by neurons in r2 and r3, the facial nucleus by neurons in r4 and r5, the glossopharyngeal nucleus by neurons in r6 and r7, and the motor nuclei of the vagus by neurons in r7 and r8. Axons of neurons in each of these nuclei course laterally within the brain, leaving the brain through exit points in the lateral neuroepithelium (of r2, r4, r6, and r7) and running together outside the brain to form the respective cranial motor nerves (V, VII, IX, X). The trigeminal (V) nerve innervates muscles in the 1st branchial arch, the facial (VII) nerve innervates muscles in the 2nd branchial arch, and the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve innervates muscles in the 3rd branchial arch. All of the visceral motor neurons (various shades of green represented on the right side of the brain stem) develop initially next to the floor plate at the ventral midline; after extending their axons toward their respective exit points, the cell bodies take a more conventional course (see panel B).

General somatic motor nuclei (various shades of blue , represented on the left side of the brain stem) are formed in r1 (trochlear nucleus), r5 and r6 (abducens nucleus), and r8 (hypoglossal nucleus). The cell bodies of these neurons remain

close to their place of birth, next to the floor plate. The axons of abducens and hypoglossal neurons exit the brain directly ventrally, without coursing laterally. The axons of trochlear neurons (light blue) extend laterally and dorsally within the brain until, caudal to the inferior colliculus, they turn medially, decussate just behind the inferior colliculus, and exit near the midline of the opposite side. B. The brain stem of a mouse embryo in which fluorescent dyes label different populations of cranial nerve VII motor neurons. A red-fluorescing dye fills the cell bodies of facial motor neurons

, via retrograde transport from the motor root of the facial nerve. These neurons develop initially in r4 and then migrate posteriorly, alongside the floor plate, to r6 (see red neurons in part A). A green-fluorescing dye fills the cell bodies of general visceral motor neurons in r5 (see light green neurons in part A) via retrograde transport from the root of the intermediate nerve (sensory and preganglionic general visceral motor axons). (Micrograph reproduced, with permission, from Dr. Ian McKay.)

then migrate laterally (arrows). Exceptions are the facial motor neurons formed in r4 (red); the cell bodies, after extending their axons toward the exit point, migrate caudally to the axial level

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 988

1st arch

12/12/20 3:24 PM

A

Edinger-Westphal Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem Motor Sensory General and special visceral Special somatic Midbrain Pons VIII


Medulla

Spinal cord

General somatic

sensory (N. V, VII, IX, X)

General and special

visceral sensory

motor (N. III, VII, IX, X)

Special visceral motor

(N. V, VII, IX, X, XI)

General somatic

motor (N. III, IV, VI, XII)

<!-- image -->

Figure 40–6 Adult cranial nerve nuclei are organized in six

functional columns on the rostrocaudal axis of the brain

stem.

A. This dorsal view of the human brain stem shows the loca tion of the cranial nerve sensory nuclei (right) and motor nuclei (left).

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 989

B. A schematic view of the functional organization of the cranial

nerve nuclei makes it clearer that they form motor and sensory

columns.

-C. The medial-lateral arrangement of the cranial nerve nuclei is shown in a cross section at the level of the medulla (compare with Figure 40–4D).

12/12/20 3:24 PM

Motor Sensory Mesencephalic

B



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

is represented ventrally and the oral region dorsally,

with the tongue extending medially toward the taste

region of the nucleus of the solitary tract, with which it

shares some afferent information concerning food texture and temperature. Axons from the spinal trigeminal nucleus descend on the same side of the brain stem into the cervical spinal cord, where they cross the midline in the anterior commissure with spinothalamic axons and join the opposite spinothalamic tract. (For this reason, upper cervical spinal cord injury may cause facial numbness.) The trigeminothalamic axons then ascend back through the brain stem in close association with the spinothalamic tract, providing inputs to brain stem nuclei for reflex motor and autonomic responses in addition to carrying pain and temperature information to the thalamus. The principal sensory trigeminal nucleus lies in the mid-pons just lateral to the trigeminal motor nucleus. It receives the axons of neurons in the trigeminal gan-

glion concerned with position sense and fine touch discrimination, the same types of sensory information carried from the rest of the body by the dorsal columns. The axons from this nucleus are bundled just medial to those from the dorsal column nuclei in the medial lemniscus, through which they ascend to the ventroposterior medial thalamus. The mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, located at the midbrain level in the lateral surface of the periaqueductal gray matter, relays mechanosensory information

from the muscles of mastication and the periodontal ligaments. The large cells of this nucleus are not central neurons but primary sensory ganglion cells that derive from the neural crest and, unlike their relatives in the trigeminal ganglion, migrate into the brain during development. The central branches of the axons of these pseudo-unipolar cells contact motor neurons in the trigeminal motor nucleus, providing monosynaptic feedback to the jaw musculature, critical for rapid and precise control of chewing movements. Special Somatic Sensory Column

The special somatic sensory column has inputs from the

acoustic and vestibular nerves and develops from the

intermediate region of the alar plate. The cochlear nuclei

(N. VIII), which lie at the lateral margin of the brain stem at the pontomedullary junction, receive afferent fibers from the spiral ganglion of the cochlea. The output of the cochlear nuclei is relayed through the pons to the superior olivary and trapezoid nuclei and bilaterally on to the inferior colliculus (Chapter 28). The vestibular nuclei (N. VIII) are more complex. They include four distinct cell groups that relay information

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 990

from the vestibular ganglion to various motor sites in

the brain stem, cerebellum, and spinal cord concerned

with maintaining balance and coordination of eye and

head movements (Chapter 27). Visceral Sensory Column

The visceral sensory column is concerned with spe-

cial visceral information (taste) and general visceral

information from the facial (VII), glossopharyngeal

(IX), and vagus nerves (X). It is derived from the most medial tier of neurons in the alar plate. All of the afferent axons from these sources terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract. The solitary tract is analogous to the spinal trigeminal tract or Lissauer's tract, bundling afferents from different cranial nerves as they course rostrocaudally along the length of the nucleus. As a result, sensory information from different regions of the viscera produces a unified map of the internal body in the nucleus. Special visceral afferents from the anterior twothirds of the tongue travel to the nucleus of the solitary tract through the chorda tympani branch of the

facial nerve, whereas those from the posterior parts of the tongue and oral cavity arrive through the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. These afferents terminate in roughly somatotopic fashion in the anterior third of the nucleus of the solitary tract (or solitary nucleus). General visceral afferents are relayed through the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. Those from the rest of the gastrointestinal tract (down to the transverse colon) terminate in the middle portion of the solitary nucleus in topographic order, whereas those from the cardiovascular and respiratory systems terminate in the caudal and lateral portions. The solitary nucleus projects directly to parasympathetic and sympathetic preganglionic motor neurons in the medulla and spinal cord that mediate various

autonomic reflexes, as well as to parts of the reticular formation that coordinate autonomic and respiratory responses. Most ascending projections from the solitary nucleus that carry information from the viscera to the forebrain are relayed through the parabrachial nucleus in the pons, although some reach the forebrain directly. Together, the solitary and parabrachial nuclei supply visceral sensory information to the hypothalamus, basal forebrain, amygdala, thalamus, and cerebral cortex. General Visceral Motor Column

All motor neurons initially develop adjacent to the

floor plate, a longitudinal strip of non-neuronal cells

12/12/20 3:24 PM

at the ventral midline of the neural tube (Chapter 45).

Neurons fated to become the three types of brain stem

motor neurons migrate dorsolaterally, settling in three

distinct rostrocaudal columns. The neurons that form the general visceral motor column take up a position along the most lateral region of the basal plate, just medial to the sulcus limitans. During development, the parasympathetic motor neurons destined to join the superior salivatory nucleus (part of the facial nerve) and nucleus ambiguus (part of the vagus nerve) migrate ventrolaterally, leaving behind axons that ascend medially before turning laterally to exit the brain stem, in a course similar to the facial motor neurons. The Edinger-Westphal nucleus (N. III) lies in the midline separating the somatic oculomotor neurons just below the floor of the cerebral aqueduct. It contains

preganglionic neurons that control pupillary constriction and lens accommodation through the ciliary ganglion. The superior salivatory nucleus (N. VII) lies just dorsal to the facial motor nucleus and comprises parasympathetic preganglionic neurons that innervate the

sublingual and submandibular salivary glands and the lacrimal glands and intracranial circulation through the sphenopalatine and submandibular parasympathetic ganglia. Parasympathetic preganglionic neurons associated with the gastrointestinal tract form a column at the level of the medulla just dorsal to the hypoglossal

nucleus and ventral to the nucleus of the solitary tract. At the most rostral end of this column is the inferior salivatory nucleus (N. IX) comprising the preganglionic neurons that innervate the parotid gland through the otic ganglion. The rest of this column constitutes the dorsal motor vagal nucleus (N. X). Most of the preganglionic neurons in this nucleus innervate the gastrointestinal tract below the diaphragm; a few are cardiomotor neurons. The nucleus ambiguus (N. X) runs the rostrocaudal length of the ventrolateral medulla and contains parasympathetic preganglionic neurons that innervate

thoracic organs, including the esophagus, heart, and respiratory system, as well as special visceral motor neurons that innervate the striated muscle of the larynx and pharynx, and neurons that generate respiratory motor patterns (see later in chapter). The parasympathetic preganglionic neurons are organized in topographic fashion, with the esophagus represented most rostrally and dorsally. Special Visceral Motor Column

The special visceral motor column includes motor

nuclei that innervate muscles derived from the

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 991

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


branchial (pharyngeal) arches. Because these arches

are homologous to the gills in fish, the muscles are

considered special visceral muscles, even though they

are striated. During development, these cell groups migrate to an intermediate position in the basal plate and are eventually located ventrolaterally in the tegmentum. The trigeminal motor nucleus (N. V) lies at midpontine levels and innervates the muscles of mastication. Nearby in separate clusters are located the accessory

trigeminal nuclei that innervate the tensor tympani, tensor veli palatini, and mylohyoid muscles, and the anterior belly of the digastric muscle. The facial motor nucleus (N. VII) lies caudal to the trigeminal motor nucleus at the level of the caudal pons and innervates the muscles of facial expression.

During development, facial motor neurons migrate medially and rostrally around the medial margin of the abducens nucleus before turning laterally, ventrally, and caudally toward their definitive position at the pontomedullary junction (Figure 40–5A). This sinuous course that the axons leave behind forms the internal genu of the facial nerve. The adjacent accessory facial motor nuclei innervate the stylohyoid and stapedius muscles and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. The nucleus ambiguus contains branchial motor neurons with axons that run in the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. These neurons innervate the striated

muscles of the larynx and pharynx. During development, these motor neurons migrate into the ventrolateral medulla, and as a consequence, their axons run dorsomedially toward the dorsal motor vagal nucleus, then turn sharply within the medulla to exit laterally, similar to the course of the facial motor axons. General Somatic Motor Column

The neurons of the somatic motor column migrate the

least during development, remaining close to the ven-

tral midline. The oculomotor nucleus (N. III) lies at the

midbrain level; it consists of five rostrocaudal columns of motor neurons innervating the medial, superior, and inferior rectus muscles, the inferior oblique muscle, and the levator of the eyelids. The motor neurons for the medial and inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles are on the side of the brain stem from which the nerve exits, whereas those for the superior rectus are on the opposite side. The levator motor neurons are bilateral. The trochlear nucleus (N. IV), which innervates the trochlear muscle, lies at the midbrain/rostral pontine level on the side of the brain stem opposite from

12/12/20 3:24 PM
at the ventral midline of the neural tube (Chapter 45).

Neurons fated to become the three types of brain stem

motor neurons migrate dorsolaterally, settling in three

distinct rostrocaudal columns. The neurons that form the general visceral motor column take up a position along the most lateral region of the basal plate, just medial to the sulcus limitans. During development, the parasympathetic motor neurons destined to join the superior salivatory nucleus (part of the facial nerve) and nucleus ambiguus (part of the vagus nerve) migrate ventrolaterally, leaving behind axons that ascend medially before turning laterally to exit the brain stem, in a course similar to the facial motor neurons. The Edinger-Westphal nucleus (N. III) lies in the midline separating the somatic oculomotor neurons just below the floor of the cerebral aqueduct. It contains

preganglionic neurons that control pupillary constriction and lens accommodation through the ciliary ganglion. The superior salivatory nucleus (N. VII) lies just dorsal to the facial motor nucleus and comprises parasympathetic preganglionic neurons that innervate the

sublingual and submandibular salivary glands and the lacrimal glands and intracranial circulation through the sphenopalatine and submandibular parasympathetic ganglia. Parasympathetic preganglionic neurons associated with the gastrointestinal tract form a column at the level of the medulla just dorsal to the hypoglossal

nucleus and ventral to the nucleus of the solitary tract. At the most rostral end of this column is the inferior salivatory nucleus (N. IX) comprising the preganglionic neurons that innervate the parotid gland through the otic ganglion. The rest of this column constitutes the dorsal motor vagal nucleus (N. X). Most of the preganglionic neurons in this nucleus innervate the gastrointestinal tract below the diaphragm; a few are cardiomotor neurons. The nucleus ambiguus (N. X) runs the rostrocaudal length of the ventrolateral medulla and contains parasympathetic preganglionic neurons that innervate

thoracic organs, including the esophagus, heart, and respiratory system, as well as special visceral motor neurons that innervate the striated muscle of the larynx and pharynx, and neurons that generate respiratory motor patterns (see later in chapter). The parasympathetic preganglionic neurons are organized in topographic fashion, with the esophagus represented most rostrally and dorsally. Special Visceral Motor Column

The special visceral motor column includes motor

nuclei that innervate muscles derived from the

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 991

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


branchial (pharyngeal) arches. Because these arches

are homologous to the gills in fish, the muscles are

considered special visceral muscles, even though they

are striated. During development, these cell groups migrate to an intermediate position in the basal plate and are eventually located ventrolaterally in the tegmentum. The trigeminal motor nucleus (N. V) lies at midpontine levels and innervates the muscles of mastication. Nearby in separate clusters are located the accessory

trigeminal nuclei that innervate the tensor tympani, tensor veli palatini, and mylohyoid muscles, and the anterior belly of the digastric muscle. The facial motor nucleus (N. VII) lies caudal to the trigeminal motor nucleus at the level of the caudal pons and innervates the muscles of facial expression.

During development, facial motor neurons migrate medially and rostrally around the medial margin of the abducens nucleus before turning laterally, ventrally, and caudally toward their definitive position at the pontomedullary junction (Figure 40–5A). This sinuous course that the axons leave behind forms the internal genu of the facial nerve. The adjacent accessory facial motor nuclei innervate the stylohyoid and stapedius muscles and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. The nucleus ambiguus contains branchial motor neurons with axons that run in the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. These neurons innervate the striated

muscles of the larynx and pharynx. During development, these motor neurons migrate into the ventrolateral medulla, and as a consequence, their axons run dorsomedially toward the dorsal motor vagal nucleus, then turn sharply within the medulla to exit laterally, similar to the course of the facial motor axons. General Somatic Motor Column

The neurons of the somatic motor column migrate the

least during development, remaining close to the ven-

tral midline. The oculomotor nucleus (N. III) lies at the

midbrain level; it consists of five rostrocaudal columns of motor neurons innervating the medial, superior, and inferior rectus muscles, the inferior oblique muscle, and the levator of the eyelids. The motor neurons for the medial and inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles are on the side of the brain stem from which the nerve exits, whereas those for the superior rectus are on the opposite side. The levator motor neurons are bilateral. The trochlear nucleus (N. IV), which innervates the trochlear muscle, lies at the midbrain/rostral pontine level on the side of the brain stem opposite from

12/12/20 3:24 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

which the nerve exits. The abducens nucleus (N. VI),

which innervates the lateral rectus muscle, is located

at the midpontine level. The hypoglossal nucleus

(N. XII) in the medulla consists of several columns of neurons, each of which innervates a single muscle of the tongue. The Organization of the Brain Stem Differs From the Spinal Cord in Three Important Ways Neuronal Ensembles in the Brain Stem Reticular Formation Coordinate Reflexes and Simple Behaviors Necessary for Homeostasis

## and Survival In the 19th century, Charles Darwin pointed out in his book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals

that the muscles of facial expression are activated in

## One major difference between the organization of the brain stem and that of the spinal cord is that many long ascending and descending sensory tracts that run

along the outside of the spinal cord are incorporated within the interior of the brain stem. Thus, the ascend ing sensory tracts (the medial lemniscus and spinothalamic tract) run through the reticular formation of the brain stem, as do the auditory, vestibular, and visceral sensory pathways. A second major difference is that in the brain stem, the cerebellum and its associated pathways form additional structures that are superimposed on the basic

plan of the spinal cord. Fibers of the cerebellar tracts and nuclei are bundled with those of the pyramidal and extrapyramidal motor systems to form a large ventral portion of the brain stem. Thus, from the midbrain to the medulla, the brain stem is divided into a dorsal portion, the tegmentum, which follows the basic segmental plan of the spinal cord, and a ventral portion, which contains the structures associated with the cerebellum and the descending motor pathways. At the level of the midbrain, the ventral (motor) portion includes the cerebral peduncles, substantia nigra, and red nuclei. The base of the pons includes the pontine nuclei, corticospinal tract, and middle cerebellar peduncle. In the medulla, the ventral motor structures include the pyramidal tracts and inferior olivary nuclei. A third major difference is that, although the hindbrain is segmented into rhombomeres during development, there is no clear repeating pattern in the adult

brain. In contrast, the spinal cord is not segmented during development, but the final pattern consists of repeating segments. The prominent ladder-like arrays of ventral root axons and dorsal root ganglia suggest that segmentation is imposed by a polarizing effect of the adjacent body segments, or somites into which they migrate—in each somite, the rostral part attracts axonal growth cones and neural crest cells, whereas the caudal part is repulsive. In the head, such patterning is lacking as the cranial mesoderm is not segmented into somites but rather develops under the influence of the rhombomeres.

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 992

-similar patterns in all mammals during similar emotional situations (fear, anger, disgust, happiness). He hypothesized that the patterns of facial expression must be deeply embedded in the organization of the brain stem. We now recognize that a wide range of reflexes and simple, repetitive, coordinated behaviors, such as facial emotional expression, breathing, and eating, are controlled by neurons in the brain stem reticular formation called pattern generators, which produce stereotyped innate responses. Impairment of cranial nerve reflexes and motor patterns in patients with neurological disease can indicate the precise site of brain stem damage. Cranial Nerve Reflexes Involve Mono- and Polysynaptic Brain Stem Relays

## The responses of the pupils to light (pupillary light reflexes) are determined by the balance between sympathetic tone in the pupillodilator muscles and para-

sympathetic tone in the pupilloconstrictor muscles of the iris. Sympathetic tone is maintained by postganglionic neurons in the superior cervical ganglion, which in turn are innervated by preganglionic neurons in the first and second thoracic spinal segments. Parasympathetic tone is supplied by postganglionic ciliary ganglion cells under the control of preganglionic neurons in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus and adjacent areas of the midbrain. Light impinging on the retina activates a special class of retinal ganglion cells that act as brightness detectors. These cells receive inputs from photopig-

ment-containing rod and cone cells, but they also have their own photopigment, melanopsin, which allows them to respond to light even when the rods and cones have degenerated. These cells send their axons through the optic nerve, chiasm, and tract to the olivary pretectal nucleus, where they terminate on neurons whose axons project to preganglionic neurons in the EdingerWestphal nucleus (Figure 40–7). Thus, injury to the dorsal midbrain in the region of the posterior commissure can prevent pupillary light responses (midposition, fixed pupils), whereas injury to the oculomotor nerve eliminates parasympathetic tone to that pupil (fixed and dilated pupil). The melanopsin-containing

12/12/20 3:24 PM

Pupilloconstrictor

muscle in the iris Edinger-Westphal

<!-- image -->

that contain the photopigment melanopsin act as luminance

detectors, sending their axons through the optic tract to the olivary pretectal nucleus, at the junction of the midbrain and the thalamus. Neurons in this nucleus project through the posterior commissure to parasympathetic preganglionic neurons in and around the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. The axons of the preganglionic cells exit with the oculomotor (III) nerve and contact ciliary ganglion cells, which control the pupilloconstrictor muscle in the iris. (Abbreviations: LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus.) retinal ganglion cells also project to the suprachias-

matic nucleus of the hypothalamus, where they entrain

circadian rhythms to the day–night cycle (Chapter 44).

Vestibulo-ocular reflexes stabilize the image on the retina during head movement by rotating the eyeballs counter to the rotation of the head. These reflexes are

activated by pathways from the vestibular ganglion and nerve to the medial, superior, and lateral vestibular nuclei, and from there to neurons in the reticular formation and ocular motor nuclei that coordinate eye movements. The reflex movements are seen most

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 993

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


clearly in comatose patients, in whom turning the head

will elicit counter-rotational movements of the eyes

(so-called doll's eye movements). Damage to these

pathways in the pons impairs these movements. The corneal reflex involves closure of both eyelids as well as upward turning of the eyes (Bell phenomenon) when the cornea is gently stimulated (eg, with a wisp

of cotton). The sensory axons from the first division of the trigeminal nerve terminate in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, which relays the sensory signals to pattern generator neurons in the reticular formation adjacent to the facial motor nucleus. The pattern generator neurons provide bilateral inputs to the motor neurons that protect the cornea from damage by causing the orbicularis oculi muscle to close the eyelid and the oculomotor nuclei to roll the eyes upward and back in the orbit. Because the output of the pattern generator is bilateral, damage along the sensory pathway prevents the reflex in both eyes, whereas damage to the facial nerve prevents closure on the same side only. The stapedial reflex contracts the stapedius muscle in response to a loud sound, thus damping movement of the ossicles. The sensory pathway is through the

cochlear nerve and nucleus to the reticular formation adjacent to the facial motor nucleus and from there to the stapedial motor neurons, which run in the facial nerve. As described earlier, in patients with injury to the facial nerve (eg, Bell palsy), the stapedial reflex is impaired, and the patient complains that sounds in that ear have a "booming" quality (hyperacusis). A variety of gastrointestinal reflexes are controlled by multisynaptic brain stem relays. For example, the tasting of food causes neurons in the solitary

nucleus that project to the reticular formation adjacent to the motor facial and dorsal motor vagal nuclei to stimulate the preganglionic salivary neurons. The contact of food in the mouth can also elicit gastric contractions and acid secretion, presumably through inputs from the solitary nucleus directly to parasympathetic preganglionic gastric neurons in the dorsal motor vagal nucleus. In patients who have had Bell palsy, the damaged VII nerve parasympathetic axons may regrow aberrantly so that salivary axons reach the lacrimal gland in error, causing tasty food to initiate reflex tearing (crocodile tears). The gag reflex protects the airway in response to stimulation of the posterior oropharynx. The afferent sensory fibers in the glossopharyngeal and vagus

nerves terminate in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, whose axons project to the reticular formation adjacent to the nucleus ambiguus. Branchial motor neurons in the nucleus ambiguus innervate the posterior pharyngeal muscles, resulting in elevation of the

12/12/20 3:24 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

palate, constriction of pharyngeal muscles (to expel the

offending stimulus), and closure of the airway. Loss of

the gag reflex on one side of the throat indicates injury

to the medulla or to cranial nerve X on that side (cranial nerve IX has such a small territory of sensory and motor innervations in the pharynx that transection of this nerve does not cause a noticeable deficit). Pattern Generators Coordinate More Complex Stereotypic Behaviors

## As Darwin proposed, pools of pattern generator neurons in the reticular formation adjacent to the facial nucleus control facial emotional expression through

stereotypic patterns of contraction of facial muscles simultaneously on the two sides of the face. Pattern generator neurons on each side of the brain stem project to the facial motor neurons on both sides of the brain, so that spontaneous facial expressions are virtually always symmetric. Even patients who have had major strokes in the cerebral hemispheres and cannot voluntarily move the contralateral orofacial muscles still tend to smile symmetrically when they hear a joke and can raise their eyebrows symmetrically, both of which are initiated by facial pattern generators. Similarly, orofacial movements involved in eating are produced by pattern generator neurons in the reticular formation near the cranial motor nuclei that

mediate the behaviors. Licking movements are organized in the reticular formation near the hypoglossal nucleus, chewing movements near the trigeminal motor nucleus, sucking movements near the facial and ambiguus nuclei, and swallowing near the nucleus ambiguus. Not surprisingly, neurons in these reticular areas are closely interconnected with each other and receive inputs from the part of the nucleus of the solitary tract concerned with taste and from the part of the spinal trigeminal nucleus concerned with tongue and oral sensation, as well as from neurons in the adjacent reticular formation that respond to more complex combinations of taste, texture, and temperature of food. As a result, even a decerebrate rat is able to make appropriate choices of which foods to swallow and which to reject. Vomiting is another example of a coordinated response mediated by pattern generator neurons. Toxic substances in the blood stream can be detected

by nerve cells in the area postrema, a small region adjacent to the nucleus of the solitary tract along the floor of the fourth ventricle. Unlike most of the brain, which is protected by a blood–brain barrier, the area postrema contains fenestrated capillaries that allow its neurons to sample the contents of the blood stream.

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 994

These neurons, when they detect a toxin, activate a

pool of neurons in the ventrolateral medulla that con-

trol a pattern of responses that clears the digestive tract

of any poisonous substances. These responses include reversal of peristalsis in the stomach and esophagus, increased abdominal muscle contraction, and activation of the same motor patterns used in the gag reflex to clear the oropharynx of unwanted material. A variety of responses organized by the brain stem require coordination of cranial motor patterns with autonomic and sometimes endocrine responses. A

good example is the baroreceptor reflex, which ensures an adequate blood flow to the brain (Chapter 41). The nucleus of the solitary tract receives information about stretch of the aortic arch through the vagus (X) nerve and stretch of the carotid sinus through the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve. This information is relayed to neurons in the ventrolateral medulla that produce a coordinated response that protects the brain against a fall in blood pressure. Reduced stretch of the aortic arch and carotid sinus reduces drive to the parasympathetic preganglionic cardiac-vagal neurons in the nucleus ambiguus,

resulting in reduced vagal tone and increased heart rate. Simultaneously, increased firing of neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla drives sympathetic preganglionic vasoconstrictor and cardioaccelerator neurons. This combination of increased cardiac output and increased vascular resistance elevates blood pressure. Meanwhile, other neurons in the ventrolateral medulla increase the firing of hypothalamic neurons that secrete vasopressin from their terminals in the posterior pituitary gland. Vasopressin also has a direct vasoconstrictor effect, and it maintains blood volume by reducing water excretion through the kidney. Control of Breathing Provides an Example of How Pattern Generators Are Integrated Into More

Complex Behaviors

## One of the most important functions of the brain stem is control of breathing. The brain stem automatically generates breathing movements beginning in utero at

11 to 13 weeks of gestation in humans, and continues nonstop from birth until death. This behavior does not require any conscious effort, and in fact, it is rare for us to even think about the need to breathe. The primary purpose of breathing is to ventilate the lungs to control blood levels of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen ions (pH). (These are often measured together clinically and referred to as "blood gases.") Breathing movements involve contraction of the diaphragm, activated by the phrenic nerve. The diaphragm is assisted

12/12/20 3:24 PM

A In vivo recording

Phrenic nerve B In vitro recording Nucleus ambiguus Hypoglossal nucleus (N. XII)

<!-- image -->

A. Rhythmic activity in the phrenic motor nerve of a guinea pig

causes contraction of the diaphragm. The firing of the phrenic nerve is phase-locked to bursts of firing by neurons in the medulla.

The activity in a single medullary neuron, recorded intracellularly, is shown. (Reproduced, with permission, from Richerson and Getting 1987. Copyright © 1987. Published by Elsevier B.V.) when necessary by accessory muscles of respiration,

including the intercostal muscles, pharyngeal mus-

cles (to change airway diameter), some neck muscles

(which help expand the chest), the tongue protruder muscles (to open the airway), and even some facial muscles (which flare the nares). Respiratory activity can be generated by the medulla even when it is isolated from the rest of the nervous system. Many medullary neurons have patterns of fir-

ing that correlate with inspiration or expiration (Figure 40–8A). Some have more refined patterns, such as firing only during early inspiration or late inspiration. These respiratory neurons are concentrated in two regions, the dorsal and ventral respiratory groups. The dorsal respiratory group is located bilaterally in and around the ventrolateral part of the nucleus of the solitary tract. Neurons in this group receive respiratory

sensory input, including afferents from stretch receptors in the lungs and peripheral chemoreceptors, and participate in such reflex actions as limitation of lung inflation at high volume (the Hering-Breuer reflex) and the ventilatory response to low oxygen (hypoxia). The ventral respiratory group, a column of neurons in and around the nucleus ambiguus, coordinates respiratory motor output. Some of these neurons are motor neurons with axons that leave the brain through the vagus nerve and innervate accessory muscles of respiration or premotor neurons that innervate the phrenic

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 995

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


nerve. The minimal tissue necessary to support this rhythm

- is a slice about 0.5 mm thick at the level of the rostral medulla. Neurons in the pre-Bötzinger complex (Pre-BötC) near the nucleus ambiguus fire bursts that are phase-locked to the motor rhythm. (Reproduced, with permission, from Smith et al. 1991. Copyright © 1991 AAAS.)

motor nucleus, whereas others form a pattern genera-

tor, the pre-Bötzinger complex, that generates respiratory

rhythm.

The intrinsic rhythmicity of the pre-Bötzinger complex is so resilient that, even in a transverse brain slice from the rostral medulla, neurons in the pre-Bötzinger

complex are able independently to generate a respiratory rhythm that can be recorded in the rootlets of the hypoglossal (XII) nerve that emerge from the ventral surface of the slices (Figure 40–8B). Acute destruction of this cell group in an intact animal results in inability to maintain a normal respiratory rhythm. The most important inputs to the respiratory pattern generator come from chemoreceptors that sense oxygen and carbon dioxide. Under normal conditions,

ventilation is primarily regulated by the levels of CO 2 rather than O 2 (Figure 40–9A). However, breathing is also strongly stimulated if O 2 becomes sufficiently low, such as at high altitude or in people with lung disease. The peripheral chemoreceptors in the carotid and aortic bodies normally respond primarily to a decrease in blood oxygen, but during hypoxia, they also become more sensitive to elevated levels of CO 2 (hypercapnia). Afferent fibers from the carotid sinus nerve travel in the glossopharyngeal nerve and activate neurons in the dorsal respiratory group. The response to hypercapnia is largely driven by central chemoreceptors in the brain stem that sense the

12/12/20 3:24 PM


20 mV


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Figure 40–9 Respiratory motor output is regu-

lated by carbon dioxide in the blood.

A. Lung ventilation (determined by the rate and

depth of breathing) in humans is steeply dependent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide

(PCO 2 ) at normal levels of the partial pressure of oxygen (PO 2 ) (&gt;100 mm Hg). When PO 2 drops to very low values (&lt;50 mm Hg), breathing is stimulated directly and also becomes more sensitive to an increase in PCO 2 (seen here as an increase in the slope of the curves for alveolar PO 2 of 37 and 47 mm Hg). (Reproduced, with permission, from Nielsen and Smith 1952.) B. Central chemoreceptors in the medulla control ventilatory motor output to maintain normal blood CO 2 . The firing rate of serotonergic neurons within

- the raphe nuclei of the medulla increases when elevated PCO 2 causes a pH decrease. The records shown here are from in vitro recordings of a neuron in the raphe nuclei of a rat at two different levels of pH (7.4, control, and 7.2, acidosis). (Reproduced, with permission, from Wang et al. 2002.) C. Serotonergic neurons are closely associated with large arteries in the ventral medulla where they can monitor local changes in PCO 2 . Two

images of the same transverse section of the rat medulla show blood vessels after injection of a red fluorescent dye into the arterial system (left) and green antibody staining for tryptophan hydroxylase, the enzyme that synthesizes serotonin (right). The basilar artery (B) is on the ventral surface of the medulla between the pyramidal tracts (P). (Reproduced, with permission, from Bradley et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.) Dorsal accompanying decrease in pH. The most sensitive area

for this is along the ventral surface of the medulla lat-


<!-- image -->

eral to the pyramidal tract. This region contains at least


system is remarkably stable in healthy people, but

a variety of diseases can alter these patterns. One of

. Glu -the most common and easily recognized patterns is Cheyne-Stokes respiration, which is characterized by repeated cycles of gradually increasing then decreasing ventilation, alternating with cessation of breathing (apnea). This periodic breathing is seen, for example, in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, where the central neurons are not sufficiently sensitive to rising CO 2 , particularly during sleep. By the time they begin to respond, CO 2 levels may already be quite high. This causes hyperventilation, which reduces CO 2 levels below the threshold where breathing is required. The result is a period of apnea, until the CO 2 levels again become quite high (Figure 40–10). A similar pattern is seen in people who have cardiac or pulmonary disease that increases the time it takes for the change in alveolar CO 2 to register with

the medulla. Cheyne-Stokes respiration often occurs in hospitalized patients with marginal cardiac or respiratory reserve when they fall asleep, thus reducing

12/12/20 3:24 PM

two sets of neurons that respond to elevated CO 2 tamatergic neurons in the retrotrapezoid nucleus in the rostral ventrolateral medulla, near the facial motor nucleus, are highly sensitive to CO 2 levels. Absence of these neurons, due to a mutation in the phox2b transcription factor required for their development, causes congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, in which there is failure to breathe adequately, particularly during sleep. In addition, serotonergic neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla, like retrotrapezoid neurons, lie along penetrating arteries and are sensitive to acidosis (Figure 40–9B,C). Genetic deletion of these neurons reduces the ventilatory response to hypercapnia, especially during sleep. Recent studies demonstrate that a serotonin 5-HT 2A agonist can restore arousal responses to CO 2 , suggesting that the serotonergic neurons play a modulatory role, increasing the sensitivity of the CO 2 reflexes during hypercapnia, and that this may be especially important during sleep.

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 996

A


B

Control Figure 40–10 Respiratory motor patterns can become unstable during sleep.

A. Sleep apnea (cessation of breathing) is a common problem

that often goes undetected. The records here show blood oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ) and CO 2 partial pressure (PCO 2 ) during

sleep in a healthy person and a patient with obstructive sleep apnea. In the healthy person, SaO 2 remains near 100%, and PCO 2 remains near 40 mm Hg during both rapid eye movement (REM) and non-REM sleep. In the patient with sleep apnea, reduced muscle tone (hypotonia) during sleep leads to collapse of the upper airway, resulting in obstruction and apnea. Repetitive apnea at the rate of approximately once per minute causes the patient's SaO 2 to fall repetitively and dramatically. (The inset shows a period of approximately 80 seconds on an expanded scale. Ventilation [V] begins at the nadir of the SaO 2 and again ceases when the blood oxygen increases.) During non-REM sleep, the patient's PCO 2 increases to near 60 mm Hg. During REM sleep, the SaO 2 and PCO 2 become even more abnormal, as worsening airway hypotonia causes greater obstruction. Many people with sleep apnea wake up repeatedly during the night because of the apnea, but the arousals are too brief for them to be aware that their sleep is interrupted. (Adapted, with permission, from Grunstein and Sullivan 1990.) B. Breathing in most normal individuals becomes unstable during sleep at high altitudes. The upper trace shows an example of a Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern in a healthy person,

during the first night after arriving at an altitude of 17,700 feet, where the low partial pressure of oxygen in the air reduces the blood SaO 2 to approximately 75% to 80%. Repeated cycles of waxing and waning ventilation are separated by periods of apnea. Administration of supplemental oxygen results in a rapid return to a normal respiratory pattern. This abnormal pattern disappears in most people after they have acclimated to the altitude. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lahiri et al. 1984.)

other behavioral drives for respiration. Although not Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem REM

Normal

Sleep

apnea

20 s

Sleep

apnea

Normal

the airway. Other neurons in the intertrigeminal zone,


<!-- image -->

dangerous in itself, it can indicate that there is a serious between the motor and principal sensory trigeminal

underlying cardiorespiratory problem that needs to be

corrected. Other inputs to the respiratory pattern generator come from the circuitry mediating particular behaviors, as breathing must be coordinated with many motor nuclei, receive facial and upper airway sensory inputs and project to the ventrolateral medulla to temporarily stop breathing to protect against accidental inspiration of dust or water. Voluntary motor pathways can take over the control of breathing during talking, eating, singing, swimming, or playing a wind instrument. Descending

. inputs cause hyperventilation at the onset of exercise, in anticipation of an increase in oxygen demand. In fact, this leads to a sustained drop in blood CO 2 during exercise—the opposite of what would be expected for a negative feedback control system. Other descending inputs from the limbic system produce hyperventilation in connection with pain or anxiety and, in some people, may be responsible for causing spontaneous panic attacks, characterized by hyperventilation and a feeling of suffocation. These various descending inputs allow efficient integration of breathing with

12/12/20 3:24 PM

actions that share the same muscles. To accomplish this coordination, respiratory neurons in the medulla receive input from neuronal networks concerned with vocalization, swallowing, sniffing, vomiting, and pain. For example, the ventral respiratory group is connected with a part of the parabrachial complex in the pons termed the pontine respiratory group or pneumotaxic center These pontine neurons coordinate breathing with behaviors such as chewing and swallowing. They can cause holding of the breath at full inspiration (called apneusis), which is required during eating and drinking. The reserve of air in the lungs permits a cough, if necessary, to expel any food or drink that may enter

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 997

A



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

other behaviors, but they ultimately must yield to

the need to maintain blood gas homeostasis, as even

a small increase in CO


produces severe air hunger

or dyspnea. Thus, the respiratory control system is a fascinating example of a brain stem pattern generator that must be sufficiently stable to ensure survival yet flexible enough to accommodate a wide variety of behaviors. Monoaminergic Neurons in the Brain Stem

Modulate Sensory, Motor, Autonomic, and

Behavioral Functions

## In addition to containing the primary sensory and motor nuclei of the cranial nerves and the reflex and pattern

generator mechanisms that control basic behaviors, the

brain stem also contains a set of modulatory cell groups. In a groundbreaking series of experiments in the 1970s, Hans Kuypers used the newly discovered method of retrograde transport of axonal tracers to identify the cell groups in the brain stem and diencephalon that contribute to modulation of spinal cord sensory and motor systems and those that send inputs directly to the cerebral cortex. To a surprising extent, these two sets of experiments, starting at opposite ends of the neuraxis, identified a common substrate whose role it is to modulate circuitry at other levels of the nervous system, almost as if it were an "autonomic system" for the brain. These cell groups have direct connections to the forebrain, brain stem, and spinal cord that regulate the overall level of function of their targets. Like the

way serotonergic neurons set the overall sensitivity of CO 2 reflexes, brain stem monoaminergic modulatory systems adjust the overall responsiveness of a wide variety of sensory systems by means of projections to sensory neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem, including nociceptive systems. Descending projections from these modulatory systems also control motor tone, which is critical for adjusting posture and gait as well as initiating finer movements. Ascending inputs to the forebrain control overall arousal as well as responses to rewarding situations. While these modulatory systems are not sufficient to accomplish motor, sensory, or cognitive tasks on their own, their ability to adjust the responsiveness of these systems plays an enormously influential role in overall behavior. Many Modulatory Systems Use Monoamines as Neurotransmitters

## The monoaminergic systems use decarboxylated derivatives of the cyclic amino acids tyrosine, tryptophan,

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 998

and histidine as neurotransmitters. They were among

the first in the brain to be identified and mapped due

to the property that some of them possess to fluoresce

when exposed to formaldehyde. In the 1960s, Dahlstrom and Fuxe used this property to identify serotonergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic cell groups in the brain stem. In the 1970s, with the development of immunohistochemical methods able to map the enzymes that synthesize monoamines, other investigators mapped neurons containing epinephrine and histamine. The cell groups of these modulatory systems in general were unlike earlier identified nuclei in the brain. Rather than forming compact clusters of cell

bodies, the monoaminergic cell groups tended to form columns that extended longitudinally through the brain stem and hypothalamus (see Figure 40–6). The monoamine systems were therefore designated with letters and numbers, to avoid confusion with other systems of nomenclature for the brain (Figure 40–11). The first cell groups identified by Dahlstrom and Fuxe were simply identified alphabetically as the "A" cell groups, and then numbered sequentially from

caudal to rostral. It was later determined that the A1– A7 cell groups produce norepinephrine and the A8– A14 groups produce dopamine. The A1, A3, and A5 designations were applied to neurons located in the ventrolateral corner of the medullary and pontine tegmentum (the A3 group was quite small and the term is no longer used), while the A2, A4, A6, and A7 names were applied to cell groups located more dorsally, similar to the columns of motor neurons in the brain stem (Figure 40–11A). The A1 and A2 groups, located among the neurons of the nucleus ambiguus and the nucleus of the solitary tract (respectively), are mainly concerned with autonomic functions. Together, they modulate hypothalamic and brain stem systems that regulate the autonomic nervous system. The noradrenergic A4–A7 cell groups have widespread influence over sensory and motor systems, ranging from the cerebral cortex to the spinal cord, and provide important modulation of arousal and wakefulness. The dopaminergic systems (Figure 40–11E) include the A8–A10 cell groups, located in the midbrain in and near the substantia nigra, that modulate motor systems

as well as forebrain mechanisms of reward and moti -vation. The A11 and A13 dopaminergic neurons, in the dorsal hypothalamus, provide input to sensory, motor, and autonomic systems in the brain stem and spinal cord. The A12, A14, and A15 neurons have a neuroendocrine role, including release of dopamine as a pituitary release-inhibiting hormone for prolactin secretion. The A16 cell group modulates olfactory inputs, and the A17 neurons in the retina modulate vision.

12/12/20 3:24 PM

A Norepinephrine/Epinephrine

Noradrenergic projections

Adrenergic projections

CTX

<!-- image -->

Cerebral cortex

Cingulate

cortex

Cingulate Cerebral cortex

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

,

third ventricle; AC, anterior commissure; AP, area postrema; AQ

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem

SCP

<!-- image -->

A1

<!-- image -->

Tuberomammillary nucleus

A1/C1

<!-- image -->

STN

<!-- image -->

,

<!-- image -->


DR (B7)

the hypothalamus; some C1 neurons project to sympathetic

preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord and control cardiovas-

cular and endocrine functions. The A5, A6 (locus ceruleus), and

, , A7 cell groups in the pons project to the spinal cord and modulate autonomic reflexes and pain sensation. The locus ceruleus also projects rostrally to the forebrain and plays an important role in arousal and attention. B. All histaminergic neurons are located in the posterior lateral hypothalamus, mostly within the tuberomammillary nucleus. These neurons project to virtually every part of the neuraxis and

, play a major role in arousal. C. Serotonergic neurons (B groups) are found within the medulla, pons, and midbrain, mostly near the midline in the raphe nuclei. Those within the medulla (the B1–B4 groups corresponding to

Sylvian aqueduct; ARC, arcuate nucleus; BM, nucleus basalis of Meynert; BP, brachium pontis; CD, caudate; CP, cerebral peduncle; DBh, horizontal limb of the diagonal band; DR, dorsal raphe; FX, fornix; IC, inferior colliculus; LC, locus ceruleus; LDT laterodorsal tegmental nucleus; MCP, middle cerebellar peduncle; MGN, medial geniculate nucleus; MR, median raphe; MS medial septum; MTT, mammillothalamic tract; NTS, nucleus tractus solitarius; OC, optic chiasm; PPT, pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus; PUT, putamen; Pyr, pyramidal tract; RM, raphe magnus; SC, superior colliculus; SCP, superior cerebellar peduncle; SN, substantia nigra; STN, spinal trigeminal nucleus; TMN tuberomammillary nucleus; VTA, ventral tegmental area.) A. Noradrenergic neurons (A groups) and adrenergic neurons (C groups) are located in the medulla and pons. The A2 and C2 groups in the dorsal medulla are part of the nucleus of the

solitary tract. The A1 and C1 groups in the ventral medulla are located near the nucleus ambiguus. Both groups project to

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 999

the raphe magnus, raphe obscurus, and raphe pallidus) project throughout the medulla and spinal cord and modulate afferent pain signals, thermoregulation, cardiovascular control, and breathing. Those within the pons and midbrain (the B5–B9 groups in the raphe pontis, median raphe, and dorsal raphe) project throughout the forebrain and contribute to arousal, mood, and cognition.

12/12/20 3:24 PM

<!-- image -->

Cerebellum

B6 B4 
B3

B2

B1

LC (A6)

T

AP

NTS (A2)

A5


MCP

CP


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

D Acetylcholine

Caudate

and putamen Caudate and putamen Lateral septum

<!-- image -->

Anterior

cingulate Hippocampus

<!-- image -->

times called Ch groups) are located in the pons, midbrain, and CD

AQ

<!-- image -->

PPT

BP

SC

SN (A9)

MTT

<!-- image -->

A11

3V

MS

DBh OC

MGN

CP

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

Cerebellum

Lateral parabrachial

Spinal

cord

A groups (A8–A17). The A8 group is in the midbrain dorsally

adjacent to the substantia nigra. The A9 cell group constitutes

basal forebrain. Those in the pons and midbrain (mesopontine

groups) are divided into a ventrolateral cluster (pedunculopontine nucleus) and the dorsomedial cluster (laterodorsal tegmental nucleus). The mesopontine cholinergic neurons project to the brain stem reticular formation and the thalamus. Those in the basal forebrain are divided into the medial septum, the nuclei of the vertical and horizontal limbs of the diagonal band, and the nucleus basalis of Meynert. These neurons project throughout the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala. Both groups play an important role in arousal, and the basal forebrain groups are also involved in more selective attention. E. Dopaminergic neurons are located in the midbrain and hypothalamus. The dopaminergic cell groups were originally included with the noradrenergic cell groups and are still labeled as

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1000

the substantia nigra pars compacta. These two groups of

neurons project to the striatum and play an important role in initiation of movement. The A10 group is located in the ventral tegmental area just medial to the substantia nigra. These cells project to the frontal and temporal cortex and limbic structures of the basal forebrain and play a role in emotion and memory. The A11 and A13 cell groups in the zona incerta of the hypothalamus project to the lower brain stem and spinal cord and regulate sympathetic preganglionic neurons. The A12, A14, and A15 cell groups are components of the neuroendocrine system. Some of them inhibit release of prolactin into the hypophysial portal circulation, and others control gonadotrophin secretion. Dopaminergic neurons are also found in the olfactory bulb (A16) and the retina (A17).

Corpus

callosum

Fornix

12/12/20 3:24 PM
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

D Acetylcholine

Caudate

and putamen Caudate and putamen Lateral septum

<!-- image -->

Anterior

cingulate Hippocampus

<!-- image -->

times called Ch groups) are located in the pons, midbrain, and CD

AQ

<!-- image -->

PPT

BP

SC

SN (A9)

MTT

<!-- image -->

A11

3V

MS

DBh OC

MGN

CP

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

Cerebellum

Lateral parabrachial

Spinal

cord

A groups (A8–A17). The A8 group is in the midbrain dorsally

adjacent to the substantia nigra. The A9 cell group constitutes

basal forebrain. Those in the pons and midbrain (mesopontine

groups) are divided into a ventrolateral cluster (pedunculopontine nucleus) and the dorsomedial cluster (laterodorsal tegmental nucleus). The mesopontine cholinergic neurons project to the brain stem reticular formation and the thalamus. Those in the basal forebrain are divided into the medial septum, the nuclei of the vertical and horizontal limbs of the diagonal band, and the nucleus basalis of Meynert. These neurons project throughout the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala. Both groups play an important role in arousal, and the basal forebrain groups are also involved in more selective attention. E. Dopaminergic neurons are located in the midbrain and hypothalamus. The dopaminergic cell groups were originally included with the noradrenergic cell groups and are still labeled as

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1000

the substantia nigra pars compacta. These two groups of

neurons project to the striatum and play an important role in initiation of movement. The A10 group is located in the ventral tegmental area just medial to the substantia nigra. These cells project to the frontal and temporal cortex and limbic structures of the basal forebrain and play a role in emotion and memory. The A11 and A13 cell groups in the zona incerta of the hypothalamus project to the lower brain stem and spinal cord and regulate sympathetic preganglionic neurons. The A12, A14, and A15 cell groups are components of the neuroendocrine system. Some of them inhibit release of prolactin into the hypophysial portal circulation, and others control gonadotrophin secretion. Dopaminergic neurons are also found in the olfactory bulb (A16) and the retina (A17).

Corpus

callosum

Fornix

12/12/20 3:24 PM

The B cell groups, which had a slightly different

color of fluorescence, were found to produce seroto-

nin. They are associated with the midline raphe cell Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


(Figure 40–12). The spontaneous regular firing pat-

tern of monoaminergic neurons is regulated by intrin-

sic pacemaker currents (Chapter 10). Tonic firing in

-vivo may be important for ensuring continuous delivery of monoamines to targets. For example, the basal ganglia depend on continuous exposure to dopamine from the neurons of the substantia nigra to facilitate motor responses. The properties of monoaminergic neurons are suited to their unique and widespread modulatory roles in brain function. Indeed, some axon terminals

of monoaminergic cells do not even form conventional synaptic connections, instead releasing neurotransmitter diffusely to many targets at once. Most

groups in the pons and medulla (Figure 40–11C). The B1–B4 cell groups in the medulla mainly provide descending modulation of sensory, motor, and autonomic neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord. The B5–B7 neurons in the pons mainly provide serotonergic innervation of the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebral cortex. The functions of serotonin in modu lating these targets can be quite complex to decipher, mainly because there are at least 14 different serotonin receptors, and different ones can be expressed by different cell types in a target area. A few years after the A and B cell groups were named, immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that some medullary neurons have the enzymes to

make dopamine and norepinephrine but do not fluoresce. These neurons, named cell groups C1–C3, were found to process these other catecholamines to adrenalin, or epinephrine. They are closely related to the A1– A3 cell groups in the medulla (Figure 40–11A). Histaminergic cell groups are mainly found in the tuberomammillary nucleus and adjacent areas of the posterior hypothalamus (near the mammillary body)

and are named E1–E5 (Figure 40–11B). They are the sole source of histaminergic actions in the entire brain, from the cerebral cortex to the spinal cord, and are involved in a variety of arousal responses. Although cholinergic neurons are not, strictly speaking, monoaminergic, some of them also participate in modulatory systems, and these have been numbered

Ch1–Ch6 (Figure 40–11D). This classification system did not include the many other cholinergic neurons in the nervous system, such as motor neurons or striatal interneurons, and is not used much anymore. Rather, scientists refer to the cholinergic neurons by their location, eg, the pedunculopontine (Ch6) and laterodorsal tegmental (Ch5) neurons in the pons, which project widely from the cerebral cortex to the medulla, and the basal forebrain (Ch1–Ch4) groups, which project to the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala. Monoaminergic Neurons Share Many Cellular Properties

## Neurons that use monoamines as neurotransmitters have many similar electrophysiological properties.

For example, most continue to fire spontaneous action

potentials in a highly regular pattern when isolated from their synaptic inputs in brain slice preparations. Their action potentials typically are followed by a slow membrane depolarization that leads to the next spike

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1001

A Firing pattern of a locus ceruleus neuron

<!-- image -->

20 mV

200 ms

B Firing of a locus ceruleus neuron across wake-sleep

W

SWS

REM

W

<!-- image -->


Figure 40–12 Monoaminergic neurons have similar firing

A. When monoaminergic neurons are isolated from synaptic

input, they fire spontaneously at a regular rate. This recording is from a noradrenergic neuron in the locus ceruleus. Action

potentials are followed by a characteristic afterhyperpolarization followed by a slow depolarization to the next spike, producing a pacemaker-like activity (Chapter 10). Serotonergic and histaminergic neurons exhibit similar spontaneous activity. B. All three monoaminergic cell types show similar patterns of firing across the wake–sleep cycle. The plot shows that a locus ceruleus neuron in a rat fires fastest when the animal is awake

(W), slows down as wakefulness wanes and during slow-wave sleep (SWS), and almost completely ceases to fire during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. (Adapted, with permission from Aston-Jones and Bloom 1981. © Society for Neuroscience.)

12/12/20 3:24 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

monoaminergic neurotransmission occurs by means

of metabotropic synaptic actions through G protein–

coupled receptors. Many monoaminergic neurons

co-release neuropeptides, which have slow effects through other G protein–coupled receptors. Thus, although some monoaminergic synaptic actions involve fast synaptic mechanisms (Chapter 13), many involve slower metabotropic and neuromodulatory pathways as well (Chapter 14). Autonomic Regulation and Breathing Are Modulated by Monoaminergic Pathways

## Neurons in the adrenergic C1 group in the rostral ventrolateral medulla play a key role in maintaining resting

vascular tone as well as adjusting vasomotor tone neces-

sitated by various behaviors. For example, an upright posture disinhibits neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla that directly innervate the sympathetic preganglionic vasomotor neurons, thus increasing vasomotor tone to prevent a drop in blood pressure (the baroreceptor reflex). Neurons in the noradrenergic A5 group in the pons inhibit the sympathetic preganglionic neurons and play a role in depressor reflexes (eg, the fall in blood pressure in response to deep pain). Serotonin regulates many different autonomic functions including gastrointestinal peristalsis, thermoregulation, cardiovascular control, and breathing.

Electrical stimulation of serotonergic neurons within the medullary raphe nuclei increases heart rate and blood pressure. Serotonergic neurons in the medulla also project to neurons in the medulla and spinal cord that regulate breathing, as described earlier.

Figure 40–13 (Opposite) Serotonergic neurons have a role

in the response to a rise in CO

infant death syndrome.

## A. Serotonergic neurons in the medulla are central respiratory chemoreceptors that are thought to stimulate breathing in response to an increase in arterial blood PCO 2 (partial pres-

PCO 2 (monitored by the resultant decrease in external pH). This increase in firing rate may sensitize ascending arousal pathways from the parabrachial nucleus, which also receives input from other CO 2 sensory pathways. This important response prevents suffocation during sleep when the airway is obstructed. (Reproduced, with permission, from Richerson 2004. Copyright © 2004 Springer Nature.)

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1002


levels as well as sudden The role of serotonergic neurons as CO


receptors

may explain why defects in the serotonergic system

have been linked to sudden infant death syndrome

(SIDS) (Figure 40–13A). SIDS is the leading cause of postneonatal mortality in the Western world, responsible for six infant deaths every day in the United States. A widely held theory holds that some SIDS cases are due to defective CO 2 chemoreception, breathing, and arousal. A relatively high number of serotonergic neurons are found in the raphe nuclei of infants who die of SIDS, but these have an immature morphology, and they are associated with relatively low serotonin levels and low serotonergic receptor densities. A plausible neurobiological mechanism for SIDS is that a defect in development of serotonergic neurons leads to reduced ability to detect a rise in partial pres-

sure of CO 2 when airflow is obstructed during sleep, thus blunting the normal protective response, which includes arousal and increased ventilation (Figure 40–13C). Infants sleeping face down would be unable to arouse sufficiently to change position when bedding blocks the airway. The Back to Sleep campaign, which encourages parents to place infants on their backs when put down to sleep, has reduced the incidence of SIDS by 50%. Pain Perception Is Modulated by Monoamine Antinociceptive Pathways

## Although pain is necessary for an animal to minimize injury, continued pain following an injury may be mal-

adaptive (eg, if the pain prevents vigorous escape from

C. Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).

1. Triple risk hypothesis of SIDS. Infants are at risk to die from

SIDS when three conditions coincide. First, the infant must be

vulnerable because of an underlying abnormality of the brain

sure of CO 2 ). The dendrites of these neurons wrap around large arteries and are stimulated by an increase in PCO 2 (see Figure 40–9C). They project to and excite motor neurons in the medulla and spinal cord that control breathing. B. Serotonergic neurons in the midbrain are also PCO 2 sensors. Shown here is the increase in firing rate of a serotonergic neuron from the dorsal raphe nucleus in response to an increase in stem, such as a genetic predisposition or an environmental insult (eg, exposure to cigarette smoke). Second, the baby must be in the stage of development (usually 2–6 months of age) when it may be difficult to change position to escape suffocation. Third, there also must be an exogenous stressor (eg, lying face down in a pillow). (Reproduced, with permission from, Filiano and Kinney 1994. © 1994 S. Karger AG.) 2. Proposed mechanism of SIDS. The combination of abnormal serotonergic neurons (eg, from exposure to cigarette smoke) and postnatal immaturity of neurons involved in respiratory

- control leads to the inability to respond effectively to airway obstruction (eg, from lying face down in a crib). The infant then does not wake up and turn its head or breathe faster, either of which would correct the problem. As a result, blood oxygenation decreases severely (hypoxia) while blood CO 2 rises (hypercapnia).

12/12/20 3:24 PM

Arousal

Breathing Medullary respiratory neuron

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

2.0

Elevated

CO


<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1003

5 min Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem C Sudden Infant Death Syndrome

1 Triple risk hypothesis Exogenous stressor

<!-- image -->

Serotonergic

neuron dysfunction Breathing instability during sleep Lack of ventilatory response

<!-- image -->


12/12/20 3:24 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

a predator). The monoaminergic systems include impor-

tant descending projections to the dorsal horn of the spi-

nal cord that modulate pain perception (Chapter 20).

The noradrenergic inputs to the spinal cord originate from the pontine cell groups A5–A7, with the locus ceruleus (A6) providing most of the input to the

dorsal horn. Similarly, the serotonergic raphe nuclei in the medulla, particularly the nucleus raphe magnus, project to the dorsal horn where they modulate the processing of information about noxious stimuli. Direct application of serotonin to dorsal horn neurons inhibits their response to noxious stimuli, and intrathecal administration of serotonin attenuates the defensive withdrawal of the paw evoked by noxious stimuli. In addition, intrathecal administration of antagonists of serotonin receptors blocks the pain inhibition evoked by stimulation of the raphe nuclei. Insight into the role of serotonin in pain processing has been used in treating migraine headaches. In particular, the triptan agonists of 5-HT 1D

Increases in the firing of raphe neurons have been

observed in animals during repetitive motor activi-

ties such as feeding, grooming, locomotion, and deep

breathing. Conversely, the firing of both serotonergic raphe and noradrenergic locus ceruleus neurons practically ceases during the atonia and lack of movement that occur during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Noradrenergic cell groups in the pons also send extensive projections to motor cell groups. This modulatory input acts on presynaptic β- and α 1 -adrenergic

receptors receptors to facilitate excitatory inputs to motor neurons (Chapter 31). The sum of these effects is to facilitate motor neuron responses in stereotypic and repetitive behaviors such as rhythmic chewing, swimming, or locomotion. Conversely, increased β-adrenergic activation during stress can exaggerate motor responses and produce tremor. Drugs that block β-adrenergic receptors are used clinically to reduce certain types of tremor and are often taken by musicians prior to performances to minimize tremulousness. Ascending Monoaminergic Projections Modulate Forebrain Systems for Motivation and Reward

## The forebrain is continuously bombarded with sensory information and must determine which stimuli deserve attention. It must also decide which of many

have been found to be therapeutically effective. One of the possible mechanisms of action of this family of tryptamine-based drugs includes presynaptic inhibition of pain afferents from the meninges, preventing sensitization of central neurons. Drugs that block monoamine reuptake, including both traditional antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, are effective in limiting pain in patients with chronic pain and migraine headaches. Motor Activity Is Facilitated by Monoaminergic Pathways

## The dopaminergic system is critical for normal motor performance. A massive projection ascends from the

substantia nigra pars compacta to the striatum, where

dopaminergic fibers act on striatal neuron receptors to release inhibition of motor responses (Chapter 38). Patients with Parkinson disease in whom midbrain dopaminergic neurons have degenerated have trouble initiating movement and difficulty sustaining move-

ments. Such patients speak softly, write with small letters, and take small steps. Conversely, drugs that facilitate dopaminergic transmission in the striatum can result in unintended behaviors, ranging from motor tics (small muscle twitches), to chorea (large-scale, jerky limb movements), to complex cognitive behaviors (such as compulsive gambling or sexual activity). As first shown by Sten Grillner, serotonergic neurons play an important role in modulating motor programs. Drugs that activate serotonin receptors can

induce hyperactivity, myoclonus, tremor, and rigidity, all of which are part of the "serotonin syndrome."

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1004

available behaviors should receive priority, based in part on experience—which behaviors have achieved rewarding outcomes in the past. The ascending monoaminergic systems play key roles in modulating all of these choices. As noted earlier, dopaminergic inputs to the striatum adjust the likelihood that a specific motor pattern or even a cognitive pattern will be expressed. Low

dopamine levels reduce output from the direct pathway striatal neurons (which release behaviors) and increase activity of indirect pathway striatal neurons (which inhibit behavior). Dopamine also has been linked to reward-based learning. Rewards are objects or events for which an animal will work (Chapter 42) and are useful in positively reinforcing behavior. Activity of dopaminergic neurons increases when a reward (such as food or juice) is unexpectedly given. But after animals are trained to expect a reward following a conditioned stimulus, the activity of the neurons increases immediately after the conditioned stimulus rather than after the reward. This pattern of activity indicates that dopaminergic neurons provide a reward-prediction error signal, an important element in reinforcement learning. The importance of dopamine in learning is also supported by observations that lesions of dopaminergic systems prevent reward-based learning.

12/12/20 3:24 PM

The same dopaminergic pathways that are important

for reward and learning are involved in addiction to

many drugs of abuse (Chapter 43)

Noradrenergic neurons of the locus ceruleus play an important role in attention. These neurons have a low baseline level of activity in drowsy monkeys. In

alert, attentive monkeys the cells have two firing patterns. In the phasic mode, the baseline activity of the neurons is low to moderate, but there are bursts of firing just before the monkey responds to stimuli to which it has been attentive. This pattern of activity is thought to facilitate selective attention to a stimulus that is about to initiate a behavior. In contrast, in the tonic mode, the baseline level of activity is elevated and does not change in response to external stimuli. This mode of firing may promote the search for a new behavioral and attentional goal when the current task is no longer rewarding (Figure 40–14).

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


Many monoaminergic neurons also participate in

regulating overall arousal (Figure 40–15). The noradr-

energic locus ceruleus, serotonergic dorsal and median

raphe nuclei, dopaminergic A10 neurons, and histaminergic tuberomammillary neurons innervate the thalamus, hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and cerebral cortex. All of these systems have the property of firing fastest during wakefulness, slowing down during slow wave (or non-REM) sleep, and grinding to a halt during REM sleep. Stimulation of noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus or histaminergic cells in the tuberomammillary nucleus increases electroencephalogram (EEG)

arousal, indicating that these systems play an important role in cortical and behavioral arousal. However, lesions restricted to one or even a combination of mon -oaminergic cell groups do not cause profound loss of wakefulness, suggesting that the various cell groups

Scanning

labile attention

activation follows presentation of the target. Performance is also

<!-- image -->

Figure 40–14 Locus ceruleus (LC) neurons exhibit different

patterns of activity with different levels of attentiveness and

task performance.  The inverted U curve shows the relationship

between a monkey's performance on a target detection task and the level of locus ceruleus activity. Histograms show the responses of LC neurons to presentation of the target during different levels of task performance. Performance is poor at low levels of LC activity because the animals are not alert. Performance is optimal when baseline activity is moderate and phasic

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1005

poor when baseline activity is high because the higher baseline

is incompatible with focusing on the assigned task. The tonic

mode (with high baseline activity) might be optimal for tasks (or contexts) that require behavioral flexibility instead of focused attention. If so, the LC could regulate the balance between focused and flexible behavior. (Adapted, with permission, from Aston-Jones, Rajkowski, and Cohen 1999. Copyright © 1999 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc.)

12/12/20 3:24 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Acetylcholine

Glutamate

Norepinephrine Lateral dorsal tegmental nucleus

(acetylcholine)

Parabrachial

nucleus

(glutamate)

Pedunculopontine

nucleus

(glutamate

,

acetylcholine)

neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine nuclei or to

the GABAergic, glutamatergic, and cholinergic neurons in the

<!-- image -->

system. Neurons using the neurotransmitters norepinephrine,

serotonin, dopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine have wide-

spread forebrain projections. Although they all contribute to arousal by modulating various brain functions, ablation of any one of these cell groups has little effect on the waking state, suggesting that none of them are essential for maintaining a waking state. On the other hand, extensive damage to glutamatergic

probably have overlapping and at least partly redun-

dant roles in sleep/wake regulation. The monoamin-

ergic pathways modulate specific cellular properties

of postsynaptic neurons in the thalamus and cerebral cortex, enhancing alertness and interaction with environmental stimuli. Monoaminergic and Cholinergic Neurons Maintain

Arousal by Modulating Forebrain Neurons

## The monoaminergic and cholinergic neurons induce arousal by activating cortical neurons both directly and indirectly. They do this in part by modulating the activ-

ity of neurons in the brain stem, hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and thalamus that activate the cerebral cortex. Both noradrenergic and serotonergic neurons innervate the parabrachial complex, a glutamatergic cell group that is critical for maintaining a waking fore-

brain. Noradrenergic inputs also activate histaminergic and orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1006

basal forebrain (orange boxes) can cause a profound and pro-

longed coma. Thus, the parabrachial–pedunculopontine–basal forebrain–cortical pathway appears to be the only one that is essential to maintaining a waking state. (Abbreviations: GABA γ-aminobutyric acid; ILT, intralaminar thalamic nuclei; LC, locus ceruleus; RT, reticular nucleus of the thalamus.)

,

as well as cholinergic and GABAergic neurons in the

basal forebrain, all of which project directly to the cer-

ebral cortex. The parabrachial, histaminergic, orexin,

and cholinergic basal forebrain neurons all excite cortical pyramidal cells, whereas the GABAergic basal forebrain neurons inhibit cortical inhibitory interneurons, thus disinhibiting the cortical pyramidal cells. The net effect of these inputs is to make the cortical pyramidal neurons more responsive to incoming sensory and cognitive inputs. Parabrachial, noradrenergic, serotonergic, histaminergic, and cholinergic inputs also innervate the thalamus and modulate its ability to transmit sensory

information to the cerebral cortex. Thalamic relay neurons fire in rhythmic bursts during sleep (Chapter 44) but fire single spikes related to incoming sensory stimuli during wakefulness. The firing pattern of thalamic and cortical neurons changes from burst mode to single-spike mode when the cells are depolarized following application of acetylcholine, norepinephrine,

12/12/20 3:24 PM

Bursting Single spikes ACh, NE or Glu

<!-- image -->

0.5 s


maintain arousal. The firing patterns of cortical and thalamic

neurons are converted from burst mode to single-spike mode by the action of acetylcholine or monoamines. Recordings are from neurons in brain slices. Thalamic and cortical neurons have limited ability to convey information when firing in rhythmic bursts. However, when in single-spike mode, their firing activity reflects the inputs they receive. Therefore, the monoaminergic and cholinergic arousal systems keep open the lines of communication necessary for cortical information processing. (Reproduced, with permission, from Steriade, McCormick, and Sejnowski 1993. Copyright © 1993 AAAS.) serotonin, or histamine (Figure 40–16). Thus, the mon-

oaminergic neurons that participate in the ascending

arousal system regulate cortical activity in part by

altering the firing of thalamic neurons. Many pharmacological agents that target monoaminergic and cholinergic systems influence arousal. For example, antihistamines cause drowsiness, sero-

tonin reuptake blockers decrease the amount of REM

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1007

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


sleep, and nicotine is a powerful stimulant. In addi-

tion, arousal is induced by amphetamines, cocaine,

and other drugs that block dopamine reuptake; mice

lacking the dopamine transporter are insensitive to such drugs. Patients with Parkinson disease, who lose dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, also lose noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus and tend

to be abnormally sleepy during the day. Some drugs used to treat Parkinson disease activate the D 2 dopamine receptor on presynaptic terminals of the remaining dopaminergic arousal neurons, which results in presynaptic inhibition, thus reducing dopamine release. As a result, although these drugs may make the movement disorder better (through their effects on postsynaptic D 2 receptors on neurons in the striatum), the inhibitory effect on remaining dopaminergic cells in the arousal system may exacerbate daytime sleepiness. Highlights

1. The plan for the brain stem and the cranial nerves

unfolds early in development, as neurons assem-

ble into clusters that come, in time, to assume

- their functional organization. Building on the basic plan of the spinal cord, motor and sensory neurons concerned with the face, head, neck, and internal viscera form into discrete nuclei with specific functions and territories of innervation. 2. Neurons in the reticular formation surrounding these cranial nerve nuclei develop into ensembles of neurons that can generate patterns of auto-
- nomic and motor responses that subserve simple, stereotyped, coordinated functions, ranging from facial expression to feeding and breathing. These behavior patterns are sufficiently complex and flexible to represent the entire behavioral repertory of a newborn baby. 3. As the forebrain develops and exerts its control over these brain stem pattern generators, a variety of more complex responses and ultimately voli-
- tional control of behavior evolve. 4. Even a skilled actor, however, finds it difficult to produce the facial expressions associated with specific emotions unless he recreates the emo-
- tional states internally, thereby triggering the prepatterned facial expressions associated with those feeling states. Thus, some of the most complex human emotions and behaviors are played out unconsciously by means of stereotypic patterns of motor and autonomic responses in the brain stem.

12/12/20 3:24 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

5. The brain stem also contains a series of cell groups

that have long-ranging and diffuse projections.

Their targets range from the cognitive and behav-

- ioral systems in the cerebral cortex, to hypothalamic and brain stem autonomic control areas, to sensory and motor control systems in the spinal cord. Many of the neurons that participate in these modulatory systems, which set the tone for more specific sensory, motor, behavioral, and autonomic outputs, use monoamines as neuromodulators. 6. As a result of the diffuseness of these modulatory pathways and the multiplicity of receptors that they employ, a large portion of all central nervous
- system–active drugs act on these pathways. Unfortunately, many of the off-target effects of these drugs are due to the diffuseness of these pathways and their use of the same neurotransmitters and receptors at multiple locations. A challenge for the future of central nervous system pharmacology will be to develop drugs more highly selective for the targeted functions that require modulation.

Schultz W. 2016. Dopamine reward prediction-error signalling:

a two-component response. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:183–195.

Sohn JW, Elmquist JK, Williams KW. 2013. Neuronal circuits

that regulate feeding behaviour and metabolism. Trends

- Neurosci 36:504–512.
- References Aston-Jones G, Cohen JD. 2005. An integrative theory of

locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: adaptive gain

and optimal performance. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:403–450.

- Aston-Jones G, Rajkowski J, Cohen J. 1999. Role of locus coeruleus in attention and behavioral flexibility. Biol Psychiatry 46:1309–1320.
- Aston-Jones G, Bloom FE. 1981. Activity of norepinephrinecontaining locus ceruleus neurons in behaving rats anticipates fluctuations in the sleep-wake cycle. J Neurosci
- 1:876–886. Bieger D, Hopkins DA. 1987. Viscerotropic representation of the upper alimentary tract in the medulla oblongata in the rat: the nucleus ambiguus. J Comp Neurol 262:546–562.
- Blessing WW, Li Y-W. 1989. Inhibitory vasomotor neurons in the caudal ventrolateral region of the medulla oblongata. Prog Brain Res 81:83–97.
- Bouret S, Richmond BJ. 2015. Sensitivity of locus coeruleus neurons to reward value for goal-directed attention. J Neurosci 35:4005–4014.
- Clifford B. Saper Joel K. Elmquist Bradley SR, Pieribone VA, Wang W, Severson CA, Jacobs RA, Richerson GB. 2002. Chemosensitive serotonergic neurons are closely associated with large medullary arteries.
- Nat Neurosci 5:401–402. Bruinstroop E, Cano G, Vanderhorst VG, et al. 2012. Spinal projections of the A5, A6 (locus coeruleus), and A7 noradrenergic cell groups in rats. J Comp Neurol 520:1985–2001.
- Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Williams EK, Umans BD, Liberles SD. 2015. Vagal sensory neuron subtypes that differentially control breathing. Cell 161:622–633.

Selected Reading

Feldman JL, Del Negro CA, Gray PA. 2013. Understanding

the rhythm of breathing: so near and yet so far. Ann Rev

## Physiol 75:423–452.

- Gautron L, Elmquist JK, Williams KW. 2015. Neural control of energy balance: translating circuits to therapies. Cell 161:133–145.
- Filiano JJ, Kinney HC. 1994. A perspective on neuropathologic findings in victims of the sudden infant death syndrome: the triple-risk model. Biol Neonate 65:194–197.
- 2 Gray PA, Janczewski WA, Mellen N, McCrimmon DR, Feldman JL. 2001. Normal breathing requires pre-Bötzinger complex neurokinin-1 receptor-expressing neurons. Nat
- Guyenet PG, Bayliss DA. 2015. Control of breathing and CO homeostasis. Neuron 87:94–961. Hodges MR, Richerson GB. 2010. Medullary serotonin neu-
- rons and their roles in central respiratory chemoreception. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 173:256–263.
- Llorca-Torralba M, Borges G, Neto F, Mico JA, Berrocoso E. 2016. Noradrenergic locus coeruleus pathways in pain modulation. Neuroscience 338:93–113.
- Neurosci 4:927–930. Grunstein RR, Sullivan CE. 1990. Neural control of respiration during sleep. In: MJ Thorpy (ed). Handbook of Sleep Disorders. New York: Marcel Dekker.
- Plum F, Posner JB, Saper CB, Schiff ND. 2007. Plum and Posner's Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Davis.
- Saper CB. 2002. The central autonomic nervous system: conscious visceral perception and autonomic pattern generation. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:433–469.
- Saper CB, Stornetta RL. 2014. Central autonomic system. In: G Paxinos (ed). The Rat Nervous System, 4th ed., pp. 627–671. San Diego: Elsevier.

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1008

- Jenny AB, Saper CB. 1987. Organization of the facial nucleus and cortico-facial projection in the monkey: a reconsideration of the upper motor neuron facial palsy. Neurol
- 37:930–939. Lahiri S, Maret K, Sherpa M, Peters R Jr. 1984. Sleep and periodic breathing at high altitude: Sherpa natives vs. sojourners. In: J West, S lahiri (eds). High Altitude and
- Man, pp. 73–90. Bethesda: American Physiological Society. Morecraft RJ, Louie JL, Herrick JL, Stilwell-Morecraft KS. 2001. Cortical innervation of the facial nucleus in the non-human primate: a new interpretation of the effects of

12/12/20 3:24 PM

stroke and related subtotal brain trauma on the muscles of

facial expression. Brain 124(Pt 1):176–208.

Mulkey DK, Stornetta RL, Weston MC, et al. 2004. Respira-

- tory control by ventral surface chemoreceptor neurons in rats. Nat Neurosci 7:1360–1369.
- Nielson M, Smith H. 1952. Studies on the regulation of respiration in acute hypoxia; with an appendix on respiratory control during prolonged hypoxia. Acta Physiol Scan
- 24:293–313. Richerson GB. 2004. Serotonergic neurons as carbon dioxide sensors that maintain pH homeostasis. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:449–461.
- Richerson GB, Getting PA. 1987. Maintenance of complex neural function during perfusion of the mammalian brain. Brain Res 409:128–132.
- Rinaman L, Card JP, Schwaber JS, Miselis RR. 1989. Ultrastructural demonstration of a gastric monosynaptic vagal

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1009

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


circuit in the nucleus of the solitary tract in rat. J Neurosci

9:1985–1996.

Smith JC, Ellenberger HH, Ballanyi K, Richter DW, Feldman

- JL. 1991. Pre-Bötzinger complex: a brain stem region that may generate respiratory rhythm in mammals. Science
- 254:726–729. Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. 1993. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679–685.
- Wang W, Bradley SR, Richerson GB. 2002. Quantification of the response of rat medullary raphe neurons to independent change in pH and PCO 2 . J Physiol 540:951–970.
- Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BE, Lowell BB, Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.

12/12/20 3:24 PM
stroke and related subtotal brain trauma on the muscles of

facial expression. Brain 124(Pt 1):176–208.

Mulkey DK, Stornetta RL, Weston MC, et al. 2004. Respira-

- tory control by ventral surface chemoreceptor neurons in rats. Nat Neurosci 7:1360–1369.
- Nielson M, Smith H. 1952. Studies on the regulation of respiration in acute hypoxia; with an appendix on respiratory control during prolonged hypoxia. Acta Physiol Scan
- 24:293–313. Richerson GB. 2004. Serotonergic neurons as carbon dioxide sensors that maintain pH homeostasis. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:449–461.
- Richerson GB, Getting PA. 1987. Maintenance of complex neural function during perfusion of the mammalian brain. Brain Res 409:128–132.
- Rinaman L, Card JP, Schwaber JS, Miselis RR. 1989. Ultrastructural demonstration of a gastric monosynaptic vagal

Kandel-Ch40\_0975-1009.indd 1009

Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem


circuit in the nucleus of the solitary tract in rat. J Neurosci

9:1985–1996.

Smith JC, Ellenberger HH, Ballanyi K, Richter DW, Feldman

- JL. 1991. Pre-Bötzinger complex: a brain stem region that may generate respiratory rhythm in mammals. Science
- 254:726–729. Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. 1993. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679–685.
- Wang W, Bradley SR, Richerson GB. 2002. Quantification of the response of rat medullary raphe neurons to independent change in pH and PCO 2 . J Physiol 540:951–970.
- Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BE, Lowell BB, Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.

12/12/20 3:24 PM


The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal,

## and Behavioral Control of Survival

Homeostasis Keeps Physiological Parameters Within a

Narrow Range and Is Essential for Survival

The Hypothalamus Coordinates Homeostatic Regulation

## The Hypothalamus Is Commonly Divided Into Three Rostrocaudal Regions

## Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Link

Interoceptive Sensory Feedback With Outputs That Control Adaptive Behaviors and Physiological

Responses Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Also Receive Descending Feedforward Input Regarding Anticipated Homeostatic Challenges

The Autonomic System Links the Brain to Physiological Responses Visceral Motor Neurons in the Autonomic System Are

## Organized Into Ganglia Preganglionic Neurons Are Localized in Three Regions

Along the Brain Stem and Spinal Cord Sympathetic Ganglia Project to Many Targets

Throughout the Body Parasympathetic Ganglia Innervate Single Organs

The Enteric Ganglia Regulate the Gastrointestinal Tract

Acetylcholine and Norepinephrine Are the Principal Transmitters of Autonomic Motor Neurons

Autonomic Responses Involve Cooperation Between the

Autonomic Divisions Visceral Sensory Information Is Relayed to the Brain Stem

and Higher Brain Structures Central Control of Autonomic Function Can Involve

## the Periaqueductal Gray, Medial Prefrontal Cortex, and Amygdala

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1010

The Neuroendocrine System Links the Brain to Physiological

Responses Through Hormones

Hypothalamic Axon Terminals in the Posterior Pituitary

## Release Oxytocin and Vasopressin Directly Into the Blood Endocrine Cells in the Anterior Pituitary Secrete

Hormones in Response to Specific Factors Released by Hypothalamic Neurons

Dedicated Hypothalamic Systems Control Specific Homeostatic Parameters Body Temperature Is Controlled by Neurons in the

## Median Preoptic Nucleus Water Balance and the Related Thirst Drive Are

Controlled by Neurons in the Vascular Organ of the Lamina Terminalis, Median Preoptic Nucleus, and

Subfornical Organ Energy Balance and the Related Hunger Drive Are Controlled by Neurons in the Arcuate Nucleus Sexually Dimorphic Regions in the Hypothalamus Control

Sex, Aggression, and Parenting Sexual Behavior and Aggression Are Controlled by

## the Preoptic Hypothalamic Area and a Subarea of the Ventromedial Hypothalamic Nucleus

Parental Behavior Is Controlled by the Preoptic Hypothalamic Area Highlights

T

he survival of an individual requires tight con-

trol of body temperature, water balance, and blood

pressure, together with sufficient food intake

and appropriate regulation of sleep/wakefulness

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

cycles. Survival of a species requires that individuals

be fertile, mate, and nurture their offspring, and that

aggression toward others be appropriate and adaptive.

Neurons in the hypothalamus control all of these key survival activities. As we shall learn in this chapter, the hypothalamus together with interconnected areas of the brain responds to bodily and emotional challenges by recruit-

ing appropriate behavioral and physiological responses. Coordination of these activities ensures constancy of the internal environment, a process known as homeostasis. The hypothalamus acts on three major systems: the autonomic motor system, the neuroendocrine system, and neural pathways that mediate motivated behavior. The autonomic motor system is distinct from the somatic motor system, which controls skeletal muscle. Whereas somatic motor neurons regulate contractions

of striated muscles (Chapter 31), autonomic motor neurons regulate blood vessels, the heart, the skin, and visceral organs through synapses upon smooth and cardiac muscle cells, upon glands cells that serve endocrine and exocrine functions, and upon metabolic targets such as adipocytes. The neuroendocrine system works differently, by secreting several peptide hormones from the pituitary, the "master gland," located just beneath the hypothalamus. These pituitary hormones control water retention by the kidney, parturition, lactation, somatic growth, gamete development, and also the release of nonpeptide hormones from three downstream glands—the gonads, adrenal cortex, and thyroid. Although largely involuntary, autonomic and neuroendocrine responses are tightly integrated with voluntary behavior executed by the somatic motor sys-

tem. Running, climbing, and lifting exemplify voluntary actions that have metabolic, cardiovascular, and thermoregulatory consequences. These needs are automatically met by the autonomic and neuroendocrine systems through changes in cardiorespiratory drive, cardiac output, regional blood flow, heat dissipation, and fuel mobilization. Such compensatory changes are implemented primarily by feedforward central commands, supplemented by reflexes activated by sensory feedback. Similarly, emotional states evoke autonomic and neuroendocrine responses. Feelings of fear, anger, happiness, and sadness have characteristic autonomic and hormonal manifestations. In this chapter, we first explore the concept of homeostasis and the general means by which it is achieved. We then discuss the anatomical and func


three classic examples of hypothalamic homeostatic

control—regulation of body temperature, of water

balance and its related deficiency drive, thirst, and of

energy balance and its drive, hunger. We conclude by examining sexually dimorphic regions of the hypothalamus and their role in regulating sexual behavior, aggression, and parenting. Additional discussion of sleep cycles and regulation of circadian rhythms can be found in Chapter 44. Homeostasis Keeps Physiological Parameters

Within a Narrow Range and Is Essential

for Survival

## In the mid-19th century, the French physiologist and founder of experimental medicine Claude Bernard

drew attention to the stability of the body's internal

environment over a broad range of behavioral states and external conditions. "The internal environment (le milieu interior)," he wrote, "is a necessary condition for a free life." Building on this idea, in the 1930s, the American physiologist Walter B. Cannon introduced the concept of homeostasis to describe the mechanisms that maintain the constancy of composition of the bodily fluids, body temperature, blood pressure, and other physiological variables—all of which are necessary for survival. Homeostatic mechanisms are highly adaptive because they greatly extend the range of conditions that can be tolerated. For example, during exercise,

many parameters can increase dramatically—cardiac output by 4- to 5-fold, oxygen and fuel consumption by 5- to 10-fold, and heat production to a similar degree. In the absence of compensatory responses, blood pressure would increase in proportion to cardiac output, rupturing blood vessels; circulating fuels would fall to critically low levels, starving cells of energy; and hyperthermia would denature cell proteins. Indeed, the capacity of homeostasis is remarkable, making it possible for animals to survive at high latitudes where seasonal temperatures can fluctuate by 70°C and for humans to run 251 km in the sands of the extremely hot Sahara Desert (Marathon des Sables). Homeostatic mechanisms greatly extend the range of habitats, activities, and traumas that can be survived. Homeostasis requires negative sensory feedback from the body. The concept of feedback loops evolved from the discovery of sensors that detect criti-

-cal physiological variables and then couple them with behavioral, autonomic, and neuroendocrine motor outputs. Drawing upon the engineering principle of negative feedback control, this led to the concept that

10/12/20 8:03 AM

tional organization of the hypothalamus and its two "involuntary" motor arms—the autonomic and neuroendocrine systems. After that, we focus in depth on

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1011


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

physiological "set points" help control key parameters

like body temperature, blood osmolarity, blood pres-

sure, and body fat content.

Set point models are appealing because thermostats are so effective in maintaining room temperature at a targeted set point and, by analogy, physiological

variables like body temperature are likewise tightly controlled. In such models, a "set point" exists for a A Set point model

Set point

<!-- image -->

Rain parameter, 37°C in the case of body temperature, and at any given moment, the real level of the parameter is assessed and compared with the targeted set point through feedback and error detection (Figure 41–1A). Any deviation above or below triggers counteracting corrective responses—if too hot, cutaneous vasodilatation, sweating, and a dip in the pool; if too cold, vasoconstriction, thermogenesis, shivering, and the donning of a sweater. For regulation of body temperature, the set point and detection of error were historically seen as emergent properties of neurons in the preoptic area of the hypothalamus (POA). Over time, the set point model required revision because intensive investigation failed to uncover any molecular or neuronal bases for encoding set points Depth at outow

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Detectors


<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1012

Hypothalamus

Neurons


Figure 41–1 (Left) Set points, settling points, and homeostasis. Effectors and performing error detection. In addition, "set point–like" regulation can, in principle, be achieved without a set point, feedback, or error detection—the so-called "settling point" model (Figure 41–1B). Consider the changing level of a lake. When rainfall is excessive, its level rises; the rivers draining the lake rise and their flow increases. The converse is true when rainfall is low. The changing flow of the rivers draining the lake thus maintains its level near a settling point without requiring an idealized set point, feedback, or error detection. While aspects of the settling point model have appeal, it too is incomplete because homeostatic processes clearly receive important feedback

A. The set point view was inspired by engineering principles.

As with a thermostat, constancy is achieved by providing feedback on the existing level of a parameter, determining how it

compares to an idealized set point, and then instituting corrective measures to return the parameter to the set point. While popular for many years, it has fallen out of favor as years of research have failed to uncover molecular and neural bases for encoding set points and performing error detection. B. The settling point model was inspired by observations that many systems achieve constancy in the absence of any feedback or error detection. In this example, the level of outflow

of water from a lake is proportional to the depth of the lake. When it rains, the increase or decrease in the level of the lake causes more or less water to flow out of the lake. The level of the lake remains fairly constant without a set point or error detection. A related example is regulation of body weight. Increased food intake leads to increased body weight. As body weight increases, the energy cost of carrying and sustaining that increased weight goes up. Because of this, body weight too should have its settling point. (Reproduced, with permission, from Speakman et al. 2011.) C. In this model the concepts of feedback in part A and settling point in part B are combined. The apparent set point is in fact the settling point, an emergent property of multiple Behavioral Effectors

feedback-informed afferent/efferent loops.

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

regarding disturbances, and this feedback produces

vital responses that hasten recovery. As we shall see,

temperature, osmolarity, and body fat are directly or

indirectly "sensed," and this affects the activity of neurons in the hypothalamus that generate counteracting responses. Most physiologists today have adopted a "distributed settling point" model that incorporates strong feedback control of multiple sensory/effector loops

(Figure 41–1C). With body temperature, for example, there is no single specific set point and no location in the brain where a single set point is encoded and error detection takes place; in short, there is no thermostat. Instead, there are multiple temperature detectors located in different sites (skin, core, and brain), and each is coupled through neuronal pathways that traverse the preoptic area on their way to different body temperature effectors (cutaneous blood vessels, sweat glands, brown fat metabolism, shivering and behavioral pathways). When engaged, each of these effectors impact body temperature. The apparent set point for body temperature is in fact the emergent settling point that results from the combined activities of the multiple feedback-informed afferent/efferent loops. As we will see later, this nuanced model also applies to regulation of blood pressure, blood osmolarity, and body fat. The Hypothalamus Coordinates

Homeostatic Regulation

## The hypothalamus integrates the status of physiological parameters with outputs to behavioral, autonomic,

and neuroendocrine motor systems and thereby regu-

lates six vital physiological functions (Table 41–1). The hypothalamus lies at the base of the brain immediately above the pituitary gland (Figure 41–2). It is bounded anteriorly (rostrally) by the diagonal band of Broca; dorsally by the anterior commissure, the bed nuclei of the stria terminalis, the zona incerta, and thalamus; and posteriorly (caudally) by the ventral tegmental area and interpeduncular nucleus. The Hypothalamus Is Commonly Divided Into Three Rostrocaudal Regions

## Regions of the hypothalamus are named according to their location and appearance in Nissl-stained sections. The hypothalamus is divided, rostral to cau-

dal, into three regions. (1) The preoptic hypothalamus lies above the optic chiasm and contains neurons that control water balance and thirst, temperature, sleep, sexual behavior, and circadian rhythms. (2) The tuberal

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1013

Table 41–1 The Hypothalamus Integrates Behavioral

(Somatomotor), Autonomic, and Neuroendocrine

Responses Involved in Six Vital Functions

1. Blood pressure and electrolyte composition. The hypo-

thalamus regulates thirst, salt appetite, and drinking

behavior; autonomic control of vasomotor tone; and the

- release of hormones such as vasopressin (via the paraventricular nucleus). 2. Energy metabolism. The hypothalamus regulates hunger and feeding behavior, the autonomic control of digestion, and the release of hormones such as gluco-
- corticoids, growth hormone, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (via the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei). 3. Reproductive (sexual and parental) behaviors. The hypothalamus controls autonomic modulation of the reproductive organs and endocrine regulation of the gonads (via
- the medial preoptic, ventromedial, and ventral premammillary nuclei). 4. Body temperature. The hypothalamus influences thermoregulatory behavior (seeking a warmer or cooler environment), controls autonomic body heat conserva-
- tion/loss mechanisms, and controls secretion of hormones that influence metabolic rate (via the preoptic region). 5. Defensive behavior. The hypothalamus regulates the stress response and fight-or-flight response to threats in the environment such as predators (via the paraven-
- tricular, anterior hypothalamic, and dorsal premammillary nuclei, and the lateral hypothalamic area). 6. Sleep–wake cycle. The hypothalamus regulates the sleep– wake cycle (via a circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus) and levels of arousal when awake (via the lat-
- eral hypothalamic area and tuberomammillary nucleus). hypothalamus lies above the pituitary and contains neu-

rons controlling pituitary hormone secretion, autonomic

outflow, and various behaviors including hunger, sexual

behavior, and aggression. (3) The posterior hypothalamus includes the posterior and mammillary nuclei, as well as histaminergic neurons in the tuberomammillary nucleus that affect arousal. The functions of other neurons in the posterior hypothalamus areas are less well defined. The lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) spans from the middle to the caudal hypothalamus. It is linked more closely to reward pathways and arousal than to main-

tenance of homeostasis and specific survival behaviors. Indeed, it is heavily connected with the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area, two areas involved in reward (Chapter 43), and contains neurons that project extensively throughout the cortex. Lastly, LHA neurons expressing the neuropeptide orexin (hypocretin) play a critical role in stabilizing wakefulness (Chapter 44).

10/12/20 8:03 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion and Feeling

<!-- image -->

shown in the sagittal view of the brain, upper right). The third

ventricle is in the midline; the paraventricular, dorsomedial,

and arcuate nuclei adjacent to the ventricle form the neuroendocrine motor zone and periventricular region at this level. The ventromedial nucleus is part of the medial column of

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1014

hypothalamic nuclei, and the lateral hypothalamic area is the

lateral zone component represented in the part of the hypo-

B. Sagittal (rostrocaudal) view of the medial column of hypothalamic nuclei, showing the adjacent (caudal) substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area of the midbrain. The functional signifi-

cance of key hypothalamic nuclei is summarized in Table 41–1.

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Link

Interoceptive Sensory Feedback With Outputs

That Control Adaptive Behaviors and

## Physiological Responses General principles of hypothalamic function have emerged over several decades. Neurons in the periphery and brain respond when parameters under homeo-

static control are disturbed. Such neurons can respond directly to the stimulus or indirectly to changes in hormones and other factors that track the regulated parameter. This sensory information is then relayed to functionally appropriate regulatory neurons in a particular site (or sites) within the hypothalamus. Once the information is integrated by hypothalamic neurons, the results are then conveyed downstream to motor circuits that control specific behaviors and physiological responses. The result is a coordinated corrective response (eg, warmth-seeking plus heat production and retention, thirst plus water retention by the kidney, or hunger plus decreased energy expenditure). Our understanding of the functions of hypothalamic neurons has been refined recently using optogenetic and chemogenetic techniques in active

animals. By selectively activating subsets of hypothalamic neurons, one can evoke specific behaviors and physiological responses, even when the need is totally absent. Key regulatory neurons for body temperature are located in the median preoptic nucleus (MnPO). Water balance is regulated by neurons in three sites—the MnPO, the vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT), and the subfornical organ (SFO)—and energy balance by neurons in the arcuate nucleus (Figure 41–2A). Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Also

Receive Descending Feedforward Input Regarding

Anticipated Homeostatic Challenges

## In addition to input from sensory signals that provide important feedback regarding the status of the body, key regulatory neurons in the hypothalamus receive

"top-down" feedforward inputs from neurons that anticipate future homeostatic challenges. For example, when food-deprived animals detect cues that predict the availability of food, there is a rapid drop in the firing of hunger-promoting neurons in the arcuate nucleus even before food is ingested. Such top-down feedforward control prepares the body for anticipated homeostatic challenges. In addition, such rapid regulation, by countering an aversive state represented by high activity in deficiencydriven neurons, could be important for motivating

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1015


deficiency-based behaviors such as thirst and hun-

ger (discussed below).

Next, we examine two effectors arms of the hypo-

thalamus—the autonomic motor system and the neuroendocrine system.

The Autonomic System Links the Brain to

Physiological Responses

## Although the autonomic motor system implements many of the physiological responses initiated by the

hypothalamus, the autonomic system is also regulated

by circuits in the brain stem and spinal cord (Chapter 40). As a consequence, autonomic functions vary in their dependence on the hypothalamus. For example, micturition is largely independent of the hypothalamus, while blood pressure regulation depends heavily on circuits in the brain stem but can also be modulated by the hypothalamus. In contrast, thermogenesis by brown adipose tissue is largely subservient to the hypothalamus. Visceral Motor Neurons in the Autonomic System Are Organized Into Ganglia

## Unlike the somatic motor system, in which motor neurons are located in the ventral spinal cord and brain stem, the cell bodies of autonomic motor neurons are

found in enlargements of peripheral nerves called ganglia. 1 The autonomic motor neurons innervate secretory epithelial cells in glands, smooth and cardiac muscle, and adipose tissue. Efforts to understand the principles of organization of autonomic ganglia began in 1880 in England with the work of Walter Gaskell and were later contin -

ued by John N. Langley. They stimulated autonomic nerves and observed the responses of end organs (eg, vasoconstriction, piloerection, sweating, pupillary constriction). They used nicotine to block signals from individual ganglia to test interactions between ganglia. Langley proposed that specific chemical substances must be released by preganglionic neurons of the autonomic ganglia and that these substances act by binding to receptors on the postganglionic neurons, which target the end organs. These ideas set the stage for the later investigations of chemical synaptic transmission.


The peripheral nerves also have sensory ganglia, located on the dor-

sal roots of the spinal cord and on five of the cranial nerves: trigemi-

nal (V), facial (VII), vestibulocochlear (VIII), glossopharyngeal (IX),

and vagus (X) (Chapter 40).

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Figure 41–3 Distinct cell types in peripheral

autonomic pathways selectively control target

cells with different phenotypes. Autonomic

motor neurons lie outside the central nervous system in ganglia controlled by preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem. These downstream neurons within parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia regulate three types of effector cells: smooth muscle, gland cells, and cardiac muscle. Additionally, downstream neurons found only in sympathetic ganglia selectively control brown adipocytes and immune cells in lymphoid tissue. This figure illustrates the three basic cell types—preganglionic neurons, downstream ganglionic neurons, and different target effector cells— that control function.

Langley also distinguished the autonomic and somatic

<!-- image -->

motor systems and in so doing, created much of our

current nomenclature.

preganglionic neurons in the general visceral motor

nuclei of four cranial nerves: the oculomotor (N. III) in

The autonomic system is divided into three divisions: sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric. All neurons in sympathetic and parasympathetic gan-

glia are controlled by preganglionic neurons whose cell bodies are located in the spinal cord and brain stem. The preganglionic neurons synthesize and release the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh), which acts on nicotinic ACh receptors on postganglionic neurons producing fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials and initiating action potentials that propagate to synapses with effector cells in end organs (Figure 41–3). The sympathetic and parasympathetic systems are differentiated by five criteria: 1. The segmental organization of their preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem

, the midbrain and the facial (N. VII), glossopharyngeal (N. IX), and vagus (N. X) in the medulla. The cranial parasympathetic nuclei are described in Chapter 40 together with the mixed cranial nerves (eg, the facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus). The spinal parasympathetic pathway originates in preganglionic neurons in sacral segments S2–S4. Their cell bodies are located in intermediate regions of the gray matter, and their axons project in peripheral nerves through the ventral roots. The sympathetic preganglionic cell column extends between the cervical and lumbosacral enlargements of the spinal cord, corresponding to the first thoracic seg-

2. The peripheral locations of their ganglia

3. The types and locations of end organs they innervate 4. The effects they produce on end organs
5. The neurotransmitters employed by their post-
3. ganglionic neurons
4. Preganglionic Neurons Are Localized in Three Regions Along the Brain Stem and Spinal Cord

## The parasympathetic pathways arise from a cranial nerve zone in the brain stem and a second zone in sacral segments of the spinal cord (Figure 41–4). These

ment and third lumbar segment (Figure 41–4). Most of the cell bodies of sympathetic preganglionic neurons are located in the intermediolateral cell column; others are found in the central autonomic area surrounding the central canal and in a band connecting the central area with the intermediolateral cell column. The axons of preganglionic sympathetic neurons project from the spinal cord through the nearest ventral root and then run with small connecting nerves known as rami communicantes before terminating on postganglionic cells in the paravertebral sympathetic chain (Figure 41–5). Sympathetic Ganglia Project to Many Targets Throughout the Body

parasympathetic zones surround a sympathetic zone that extends continuously in thoracic and lumbar segments of the cord.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1016

## The sympathetic motor system regulates systemic physiological parameters such as blood pressure and body temperature by influencing target cells within vir-

tually every tissue throughout the body (Figure 41–4).

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Preganglionic

neurons Postganglionic neurons Effector cells Smooth muscle cell Gland cell Cardiac muscle cell Brown adipocytes Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival Sympathetic division Parasympathetic division close to the spinal column and supply virtually every tissue in spinal cord and from supraspinal structures that control the activity of the preganglionic neurons.

<!-- image -->

the body. Some tissues, such as skeletal muscle, are regulated This regulation depends on synaptic input from the

Important groups of supraspinal neurons that excite preganglionic sympathetic activity are located in the rostral ventrolateral medulla, the raphe pallidus in

the brain stem, and the paraventricular nucleus in the hypothalamus. Preganglionic neurons integrate these descending inputs along with local segmental sensory inputs and form synapses with neurons in paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia (Figure 41–5). Ganglionic neurons in turn form synapses with a variety of end organs, including blood vessels, heart,

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1017


Cervical

Thoracic

Lumbar

Sacral

include the skin or skeletal muscle.

bronchial airways, piloerector muscles, brown fat, and

salivary and sweat glands. Sympathetic neurons also

regulate immune function through projections to pri-

mary lymphoid tissue in the bone marrow and thymus and to secondary lymphoid cells in the spleen. A subset of preganglionic neurons synapse on chromaffin cells in the medulla of the adrenal gland (Figure 41–5), which secrete epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline) into the circulation as hormones to act on distant targets. The paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia differ in both location and organization. Paravertebral ganglia are distributed segmentally,

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

<!-- image -->

axons of preganglionic cells in the spinal cord reach postgan-

glionic neurons by way of ventral roots and the paravertebral sympathetic chain. The axons either form synapses on extending bilaterally as two chains from the first cer-

vical segment to the last sacral segment. The chains

lie lateral to the vertebral column at its ventral mar

-

gin and generally contain one ganglion per segment (Figures 41–4 and 41–5). Two important exceptions are the superior cervical and stellate ganglia. The superior cervical ganglion is a coalescence of several cervical ganglia and supplies sympathetic innervation to the entire head, including the cerebral vasculature. The stellate ganglion, which innervates the heart and lungs, is a coalescence of ganglia from lower cervical segments and the first thoracic segment. These sympathetic pathways have an orderly somatotopic relation to one another from their segmental origin in preganglionic neurons to their terminus in peripheral targets. The prevertebral ganglia are midline structures that lie close to the arteries for which they are named (Figures 41–4 and 41–5). In addition to sending

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1018

Postganglionic bers

to effector organs

Chromafn cells in

the adrenal medulla

splanchnic nerves form synapses with postganglionic neurons

in prevertebral ganglia and with chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla. sympathetic signals to visceral organs in the abdomen

and pelvis, these ganglia also receive sensory feedback

from their end organs.

Parasympathetic Ganglia Innervate Single Organs

In contrast to sympathetic ganglia, which regulate

## many targets and lie some distance from their targets close to the spinal cord, parasympathetic ganglia gen-

erally innervate single end organs and lie near to or within the end organs they regulate (Figure 41–4). In addition, the parasympathetic system does not influence lymphoid tissue, skin, or skeletal muscle except in the head, where it regulates vascular beds in the jaw, lip, and tongue. The cranial and sacral parasympathetic ganglia innervate different targets. The cranial outflow includes four ganglia in the head (Chapter 40). The oculomotor

10/12/20 8:03 AM
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

<!-- image -->

axons of preganglionic cells in the spinal cord reach postgan-

glionic neurons by way of ventral roots and the paravertebral sympathetic chain. The axons either form synapses on extending bilaterally as two chains from the first cer-

vical segment to the last sacral segment. The chains

lie lateral to the vertebral column at its ventral mar

-

gin and generally contain one ganglion per segment (Figures 41–4 and 41–5). Two important exceptions are the superior cervical and stellate ganglia. The superior cervical ganglion is a coalescence of several cervical ganglia and supplies sympathetic innervation to the entire head, including the cerebral vasculature. The stellate ganglion, which innervates the heart and lungs, is a coalescence of ganglia from lower cervical segments and the first thoracic segment. These sympathetic pathways have an orderly somatotopic relation to one another from their segmental origin in preganglionic neurons to their terminus in peripheral targets. The prevertebral ganglia are midline structures that lie close to the arteries for which they are named (Figures 41–4 and 41–5). In addition to sending

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1018

Postganglionic bers

to effector organs

Chromafn cells in

the adrenal medulla

splanchnic nerves form synapses with postganglionic neurons

in prevertebral ganglia and with chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla. sympathetic signals to visceral organs in the abdomen

and pelvis, these ganglia also receive sensory feedback

from their end organs.

Parasympathetic Ganglia Innervate Single Organs

In contrast to sympathetic ganglia, which regulate

## many targets and lie some distance from their targets close to the spinal cord, parasympathetic ganglia gen-

erally innervate single end organs and lie near to or within the end organs they regulate (Figure 41–4). In addition, the parasympathetic system does not influence lymphoid tissue, skin, or skeletal muscle except in the head, where it regulates vascular beds in the jaw, lip, and tongue. The cranial and sacral parasympathetic ganglia innervate different targets. The cranial outflow includes four ganglia in the head (Chapter 40). The oculomotor

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

(III) nerve projects to the ciliary ganglion, which con-

trols pupillary size and focus by innervating the iris

and ciliary muscles. The facial (VII) nerve and a small

component of the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve project to the pterygopalatine (or sphenopalatine) ganglion, which promotes production of tears by the lacrimal glands and mucus by the nasal and palatine glands. Cranial nerve IX and a small component of nerve VII project to the otic ganglion. Its postganglionic neurons innervate the parotid, the largest salivary gland. Nerve VII also projects to the submandibular ganglion, which controls secretion of saliva by the submaxillary and sublingual glands. The vagus (X) nerve projects broadly to parasympathetic ganglia in the heart, lungs, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas. It also projects to the stomach, small

intestine, and more rostral segments of the gastrointestinal tract. The caudal parasympathetic outflow supplies the large intestine, rectum, bladder, and reproductive organs. The Enteric Ganglia Regulate the Gastrointestinal Tract

## The entire gastrointestinal tract, from the esophagus to the rectum—and including the pancreas and

gallbladder—is controlled by the system of enteric

ganglia. This system, by far the largest and most complex division of the autonomic nervous system, contains as many as 100 million neurons. The enteric system has been studied most extensively in the small intestine of the guinea pig. Its activity is coordinated by two interconnected plexuses,

small islands of interconnected neurons. The myenteric plexus controls smooth muscle movements of the gastrointestinal tract; the submucous plexus controls mucosal function (Figure 41–6). Working together, this distributed network of ganglia coordinates the orderly peristaltic propulsion of gastrointestinal contents and controls the secretions of the stomach and intestines and other components of digestion. In addition, the enteric system regulates local blood flow and also immune function in Peyer's patches. The enteric system is modulated by external inputs from sympathetic prevertebral ganglia and from parasympathetic components of the vagus nerve. Unlike the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic system, the enteric plexus contains interneurons and sensory neurons in addition

to motor neurons. This intrinsic neural circuitry can maintain the basic functions of the gut even after the splanchnic sympathetic and vagal parasympathetic pathways are cut. Through splanchnic nerves and the

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1019


afferent portion of the vagus nerve, the gastrointes-

tinal tract also sends sensory information about the

physiological status of the tract to the spinal cord

and brain stem. Acetylcholine and Norepinephrine Are the Principal Transmitters of Autonomic Motor Neurons

## All preganglionic neurons in the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems use ACh as their excita-

tory neurotransmitter, activating ionotropic nicotinic

ACh receptors on ganglionic neurons. These receptors resemble those at the neuromuscular junction in having nonselective cation pores, but they are encoded by different genes. Activation of the ganglionic neurons triggers action potentials that propagate to postganglionic synapses with end organs in the periphery. At these

end organ synapses, parasympathetic neurons release ACh, which activates muscarinic G protein–coupled receptors; sympathetic neurons release norepinephrine, which activates α- and β-adrenergic G protein– coupled receptors. The postsynaptic action can be either excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the type of target cell and its receptors (Table 41–2). Notable exceptions to this organization are the sympathetic postganglionic neurons that control sweat glands. They assume a cholinergic phenotype after birth. In addition to acting on different receptors in different postsynaptic cells, one transmitter can activate different receptor types in the same postsynaptic cell.

This principle was first discovered in sympathetic ganglia where ACh activates both nicotinic and muscarinic postsynaptic receptors to produce both a fast and slow excitatory postsynaptic potential (Figure 41–7A and Chapter 14). In some cases, one transmitter can activate both a postsynaptic receptor as well as a receptor on the presynaptic terminals from which the transmitter was released. Such presynaptic responses can cause either presynaptic inhibition or presynaptic facilitation (Figure 41–7B and Chapter 15). This specialization of synaptic transmission in sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons leads to functional diversity in the regulation of end organ function. Cholinergic and adrenergic synaptic transmission in the peripheral autonomic motor system is often modulated by the co-release of various neuropep-

tides, nitric oxide, or adenosine triphosphate, which by activating multiple receptor types further contribute to functional diversity (Table 41–2 and Figure 41–7C). The motor responses elicited in end organs depend on the identity of the postganglionic neurotransmitters and the pre- and postsynaptic receptors

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A Cross section of intestinal wall

between the layers of intestinal wall (A and B). At least 14 types B Layers of wall Myenteric plexus

of neurons have been identified within the enteric system based on morphology, chemical coding, and functional properties (C). Four sets of motor neurons provide excitatory (+) and inhibitory ( – ) inputs to two smooth muscle layers. Three additional groups of motor neurons control secretions from the mucosa and produce vasodilation. The network also includes two major classes

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1020

Circular Submucous plexus Submucosal Interneuron

,

,

calcitonin gene-related polypeptide; DYN, dynorphin; ENK

,

enkephalin; GAL, galanin; NO, nitric oxide; NPY, neuropeptide Y; PACAP, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide; SOM somatostatin; Tk, tachykinin; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide; 5-HT, serotonin.) (Parts A and B adapted, with permission, from Furness and Costa 1980; part C reproduced, with permission, from Furness et al. 2004. Copyright © 2004 Elsevier Ltd.)

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

Table 41–2 Autonomic Neurotransmitters and Their Receptors

Transmitter

Norepinephrine Receptor

α

Responses

Stimulates smooth muscle contraction in arteries, urethra,

| 1  gastrointestinal tract, iris (pupillary dilation), uterine contractions  during pregnancy, ejaculation; glycogenolysis in liver; glandular  secretion (salivary glands, lacrimal glands).  α  2  Presynaptic inhibition of transmitter release from sympathetic  and parasympathetic nerve terminals; stimulates contraction  in some arterial smooth muscle.  β  1  Increases heart rate and strength of contraction.  β  2  Relaxes smooth muscle in airways and gastrointestinal  tract; stimulates glycogenolysis in liver.  β  3  Stimulates lipolysis in white adipocytes and thermogenesis  in brown adipocytes; inhibits bladder contraction.  Acetylcholine  Nicotinic  Fast EPSP in autonomic ganglion cells.  Muscarinic: M  1,  M  2,  M  3  Glandular secretion; ocular circular muscle (pupillary constriction);  ciliary muscles (focus of lens); stimulates endothelial production  of NO and vasodilation; slows EPSPs in sympathetic neurons;  slows heart rate; presynaptic inhibition at cholinergic nerve  terminals; bladder contraction; salivary gland secretion.  Neuropeptide Y  Y  1  , Y  2  Stimulates arterial contraction and potentiates responses  mediated by α  1  -adrenergic receptors; presynaptic inhibition  of transmitter release from some postganglionic sympathetic  nerve terminals.  NO  Diffuses through  membranes; often acts  to stimulate intracellular  soluble guanylate cyclase  Vasodilation, penile erection, urethral relaxation.  Vasoactive  intestinal peptide  VIPAC1, VIPAC2  Glandular secretion and dilation of blood vessels  supplying glands.  ATP  P  2X  , P  2Y  Fast and slow excitation of smooth muscle in bladder,  vas deferens, and arteries.  ATP, adenosine triphosphate; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential; NO, nitric oxide.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

at the postganglionic synapse. For example, ACh and

vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) are frequently

co-released from neurons that control glandular

secretion (Figure 41–7C). In salivary glands, the two transmitters act directly to evoke secretion. In addition, VIP causes dilation of the blood vessels supplying the gland. Because cotransmitters can be released in varying proportions that depend on the frequency of presynaptic firing, different patterns of activity can regulate the volume of secretions, their protein and water content, and their viscosity. This regulation operates both through a direct effect on the gland cells and through indirect effects on the glandular blood flow that provides the water contained in secretions.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1021

Understanding the pharmacology of these receptors

and the second-messenger signaling pathways they

control is important in the treatment of numerous

medical conditions, including hypertension, heart failure, asthma, emphysema, allergies, sexual dysfunction, and incontinence. Autonomic Responses Involve Cooperation Between the Autonomic Divisions

## To survive, animals and humans must have "fight-orflight" responses in order to stand and fight a preda-

tor or run away and live to see another day. Walter

Cannon, in addition to introducing the concept of

10/12/20 8:03 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A Acetylcholine

Ganglionic

synapse C Acetylcholine + VIP

Secretomotor

junction

B Norepinephrine

Neurovascular

junction ACh Muscarinic ACh receptor

<!-- image -->

-adrenergic receptors to

C. Cotransmission involves the co-activation of more than one

type of receptor by more than one transmitter. Parasympathetic postganglionic nerve terminals in the salivary glands release

both ACh and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) to control secretion. At some autonomic synapses with end organs, three or more receptor types are activated.

the extremes of autonomic behavior. Actually, during

everyday life, the different divisions of the autonomic

system are tightly integrated. In addition, we now

know that the sympathetic system is less diffusely organized than first envisioned by Cannon. Even within the sympathetic division, subsets of neurons control specific targets, and these pathways can be activated independently. As in the somatic motor system, reflexes in the autonomic motor system are elicited through sensory pathways and are hierarchically organized. An

important feature of this organization is that it allows for coordination between the different divisions of the autonomic system. The interplay between different systems in simple autonomic behaviors is analogous to the role of antagonist muscles in locomotion. To walk, one must alternately contract antagonist muscles that flex and extend a joint. Similarly, the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems are often partners in the regulation of end organs. In most cases, ranging from the simplest reflexes to more complex behaviors, all three peripheral divisions of the autonomic system work together. We illustrate this organization with two examples: control of the bladder (micturition reflex) and regulation of blood pressure.

10/12/20 8:03 AM

A. In sympathetic ganglia, acetylcholine (ACh) can activate both

nicotinic and muscarinic receptors to produce fast and slow postsynaptic potentials, respectively.

B. At neurovascular junctions, norepinephrine can simultaneously activate postsynaptic α 1 -adrenergic receptors to produce

homeostasis, also appreciated that this fight-or-flight

response is a critical sympathetic function.

Two important ideas underlie this insight. First, the

sympathetic and parasympathetic systems play complementary, even antagonistic, roles; the sympathetic sys-

tem promotes arousal, defense, and escape, whereas the parasympathetic system promotes eating and procreation. Second, actions of the sympathetic system are relatively diffuse; they influence all parts of the body and once turned on can persist for some time. These ideas are behind the popular notion of the "adrenaline rush" produced by excitement, as by a roller coaster ride. We now know that extreme sympathetic responses such as "fight-or-flight" can have long-term pathological consequences resulting in the syndrome known as

post-traumatic stress disorder (Chapter 61). This disorder was first recognized in soldiers during World War I, when it was referred to as "shell shock." A variety of life-threatening experiences, ranging from sexual abuse and domestic violence to aircraft disasters, can also induce post-traumatic stress disorder, which affects millions of people in the United States alone. Because the fight-or-flight model assumes antagonistic roles for the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, Cannon's model led to an overemphasis on

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1022

Bladder Control

The micturition reflex is an example of a physiologi-

cal cycle resulting from coordination between sympa-

thetic and parasympathetic systems. In this cycle, the

bladder is emptied by the parasympathetic pathway, which contracts the bladder and relaxes the urethra. The sympathetic system allows the bladder to fill by stimulating the urethra and inhibiting the parasympathetic pathway, thus inhibiting the reflex for bladder emptying. The sensory feedback required for this behavior is integrated with the motor outflow at both spinal and supraspinal levels (Figure 41–8). Spinal components of the reflex are most influential during the storage phase of the micturition cycle, when sympathetic and somatic motor effects predomi-

nate. When the bladder is full, its distension triggers a sensory signal sufficient to activate the pontine micturition center (PMC). Descending signals from the PMC then increase parasympathetic outflow. Somatic control of the external urinary sphincter, which consists of striated muscle, contributes to both phases of the micturition cycle and is a voluntary behavior that originates through forebrain mechanisms (Figure 41–8). Patients with spinal cord injuries at the cervical or thoracic levels retain the reflex but not voluntary control of urination, because the connections between the bladder and the pons are severed. Blood Pressure Regulation

The baroreceptor reflex is one of the simplest mecha-

nisms for regulating blood pressure and further illus-

trates coordinated homeostatic control by antagonist

sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways. It prevents orthostatic hypotension and fainting by compensating for rapid hydrostatic effects produced by changes in posture. When a recumbent person stands up, the sudden elevation of the head above the heart causes a transient decrease of cerebral blood pressure that is rapidly sensed by baroreceptors in the carotid sinus in the neck (Figure 41–9). Other important pressure sensors are located in the aortic arch and in the pulmonary circulation. When neurons in the ventrolateral medulla detect the decrease in afferent baroreceptor activity produced by low blood pressure, they produce a reflexive sup-

pression of parasympathetic activity to the heart and stimulation of sympathetic activity to the heart and vascular system. These changes in autonomic tone restore blood pressure by increasing heart rate, the strength of cardiac contractions, and the overall vascular resistance to blood flow through arterial vasoconstriction.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1023

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival


Under the converse condition of elevated arte

-

rial pressure, the increase in baroreceptor activity

enhances parasympathetic inhibition of the heart and

decreases sympathetic stimulation of cardiac function and vascular resistance. In general, the parasympathetic component of the baroreceptor reflex has a more rapid onset and is briefer than the sympathetic component. Consequently, parasympathetic activity is critical for the rapid response of baroreceptor reflexes but less important than sympathetic activity for long-term blood pressure regulation.

Visceral Sensory Information Is Relayed to the

Brain Stem and Higher Brain Structures

## Visceral sensory information reaches the brain mainly through two cranial nerves (IX and X), which end in

caudal segments of the nucleus of the solitary tract

(NTS), and through the abdominal splanchnic nerves, which end in the spinal cord (Chapter 40). The splanchnic information is transmitted to the brain through the spinothalamic tract (Chapter 4), which branches out along the way and also sends afferents to the NTS and lateral parabrachial nucleus. The NTS relays sensory information in two different directions. First, it projects to networks in the brain stem and spinal cord that control and coordinate auto-

nomic reflexes (as we saw for the baroreceptor reflex). In this way, visceral sensory signals relayed through the NTS regulate vagal motor control of the heart and gastrointestinal tract directly. Some neurons in the NTS project to neurons in the ventrolateral medullary reticular formation that control blood pressure by differentially regulating blood flow in particular vascular beds (Figure 41–9). Second, the NTS sends ascending projections to the forebrain, relaying visceral information to higher structures (Figure 41–10A). These higher structures, including the hypothalamus, use this information to coordinate autonomic, neuroendocrine, and behavioral responses. Visceral sensory information is relayed from the NTS to the forebrain via direct and indirect projections (Figure 41–10A). The major indirect path-

way involves the lateral parabrachial nucleus, which receives afferents from the NTS and sends efferents to higher structures, including the amygdala, hypothalamus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, insular cortex, and infralimbic/prelimbic cortex. The direct projections from the NTS target many of these same forebrain sites. The rostral NTS is an important part of the afferent taste pathway (Chapter 29). Information

10/12/20 8:03 AM

the autonomic system. (Adapted from DeGroat, Booth, and Periaqueductal gray matter micturition center

(Barrington's nucleus)

Pons

Lumbar

spinal cord

Sacral

spinal cord

When filling causes the bladder to reach a critical volume,

the associated increase in sensory activity reaches a thresh-

old that allows impulses to pass through the pontine micturi-

,

+

Yoshimura 1993.) When bladder volume is low, urinary outflow is inhibited because activity in the sympathetic pathway is greater than activity in the parasympathetic pathway. Mild distension of the detrusor (storage portion of the bladder) initiates a low level of sensory

<!-- image -->

activity, which reflexively activates spinal preganglionic neurons. The resulting low level of preganglionic activity is effectively transmitted and amplified by the sympathetic inferior mesenteric ganglion but filtered out by the parasympathetic bladder ganglion because of differences in patterns of synaptic convergence in the two ganglia. The resulting predominance of sympathetic tone keeps the detrusor relaxed and the urethra constricted. Sympathetic postganglionic fibers also reduce parasympathetic activity by inhibiting preganglionic release of acetylcholine. In addition to their effects on the autonomic outflow, the sensory signals are sufficient to keep the external urinary sphincter closed.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1024

tion center (Barrington's nucleus). Descending activity from this nucleus then further excites the parasympathetic outflow. The resulting increase in parasympathetic preganglionic firing promotes summation of fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials and initiation of postsynaptic action potentials in the bladder ganglion as it switches to its "on" state. During the emptying process, descending pathways also inhibit the sympathetic and somatic outflows through inhibitory spinal interneurons. Inhibition of somatic motor neurons in Onuf's nucleus causes relaxation and opening of the external sphincter. In this figure, the sacral spinal cord is enlarged relative to the other slices. (Abbreviations: α 1, alpha-1 adrenergic receptor, α 2 , alpha-2 adrenergic receptor, β 3 , beta-3 adrenergic receptor, GABA γ-aminobutyric acid; M 3 , muscarinic ACh receptor 3; nic, nicotinic receptor; NO, nitric oxide; P2X, purinergic receptor.)

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

Descending

vasomotor

<!-- image -->

feedback loop with gain. Arterial blood pressure is sensed

by baroreceptors, a type of stretch receptor neuron, in the

carotid sinus near the base of the brain. After integration in the medulla, this information provides negative feedback control of the cardiovascular system. The sympathetic component of the circuit includes outputs that stimulate the heart's pumping capacity (cardiac output) by increasing heart rate and the strength of contractions. In addition, sympathetic stimulation causes arteries to contract, which raises the hydraulic resistance to blood flow. Together, the effects of increased cardiac in this pathway is relayed via the medial parabrachial

nucleus to the taste area of insular cortex.

Central Control of Autonomic Function Can

Involve the Periaqueductal Gray, Medial

Prefrontal Cortex, and Amygdala

## The periaqueductal gray, which surrounds the cerebral aqueduct in the midbrain, receives inputs from most

parts of the central autonomic network and projects to

the medullary reticular formation to initiate integrated behavioral and autonomic responses. For example, in the defensive "fight-or-flight" response, the periaqueductal gray helps redirect blood flow from the

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1025

preganglionic

sympathetic

cell column

output and increased vascular resistance raise mean arterial

blood pressure. Inhibitory projections from the caudal to the

rostral ventral lateral medulla create negative feedback so

that an increase in blood pressure inhibits sympathetic activity, whereas a decrease raises sympathetic activity. Although omitted for simplicity, parasympathetic neurons in the cardiac ganglion also contribute to the reflex by creating an inhibitory cardiac input that is functionally antagonistic to the sympathetic pathway (Figure 41–10). During baroreceptor reflexes, parasympathetic activity within the heart is therefore increased by hypertension and reduced by hypotension. digestive system to the hind limbs, thus enhancing

running (Figure 41–10B).

The medial prefrontal cerebral cortex is a visceral

sensory-motor region. It includes two functional areas that interact with each other: the rostral insular cortex

and the rostromedial tip of the cingulate gyrus (also referred to as the infralimbic and prelimbic areas). Stimulation here can produce a variety of autonomic effects including contractions of the stomach and changes in blood pressure. These visceral sensory and motor areas of cortex send descending projections to the parts of the central autonomic network in the brain stem discussed above. Finally, visceral regions of cortex, along with many subcortical parts of the central autonomic

10/12/20 8:03 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A Afferent pathways

Cortex

Amygdala

Heart B Efferent pathways Hypothalamus Nucleus ambiguus Ventrolateral medulla Gut

<!-- image -->

Figure 41–10 The central autonomic network. Nearly all of

the cell groups illustrated here are interconnected with one

another, forming the central autonomic network.

A. Visceral information (solid lines) is distributed to the brain from the nucleus of the solitary tract and from ascending spinal pathways activated by the splanchnic nerves (from the

gut, for example). The nucleus of the solitary tract distributes this information to preganglionic parasympathetic neurons (the dorsal motor vagal nucleus and nucleus ambiguus), to regions of the ventrolateral medulla that coordinate autonomic and respiratory reflexes, and to more rostral parts of the central autonomic network in the pons (parabrachial nucleus), midbrain (periaqueductal gray), and forebrain. The parabrachial nucleus also projects to many of the more rostral components of the central autonomic network, including visceral and gustatory nuclei of the thalamus (dotted lines).

network, interact with the amygdala. Complex path-

ways between certain amygdalar cell groups under-

lie certain conditioned emotional responses—learned

associations between specific stimuli and behaviors with accompanying autonomic responses. When a rat learns that a mild electric shock follows an audi -tory cue, the auditory cue alone comes to produce the elevated heart rate and freezing that was originally elicited by the shock alone (Chapters 42 and 53). Such learned responses are prevented by selective lesions of the amygdalar region, which projects to the

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1026

Parabrachial

Dorsal motor

vagal nucleus

Nucleus of the

solitary tract

autonomic network, including the nucleus of the solitary

tract, parabrachial nucleus, periaqueductal gray, hypothalamus, amygdala, and cortex. The spinal cord also projects to the main somatosensory nucleus of the thalamus (ventral posterolateral nucleus). B. All of the efferent pathways shown here (except perhaps for the periaqueductal gray) project directly to autonomic preganglionic neurons. In the hypothalamus, the descending division of

the paraventricular nucleus and three cell clusters in the lateral zone project heavily to both parasympathetic and sympathetic preganglionic neurons. Other pathways (not shown) arise from certain monoaminergic cell groups in the brain stem, including noradrenergic neurons in the A5 region and serotonergic neurons in the raphe nuclei.

hypothalamus and lower brain stem parts of the cen-

tral autonomic network.

The Neuroendocrine System Links the Brain to

Physiological Responses Through Hormones

## Another effector arm of the hypothalamus is the neuroendocrine system, which controls secretion of hor-

mones by the pituitary gland. The pituitary has two

functionally and anatomically distinct subdivisions,

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Periaqueductal

gray matter

Parabrachial

nucleus

Dorsal motor

vagal nucleus

Nucleus of the

solitary tract Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival the anterior and posterior pituitary. The posterior pituitary is an extension of the brain and contains hormone-secreting axon terminals of hypothalamic neurons. These terminals secrete vasopressin or oxytocin directly into the systemic circulation. The anterior pituitary, on the other hand, is entirely nonneuronal and is composed of five types of endocrine cells. Hormone secretion from these cells is controlled by stimulatory and inhibitory factors released by hypothalamic neurons into a specialized circulatory system that carries blood from the base of the brain (median eminence) to the anterior pituitary. Hypothalamic Axon Terminals in the Posterior Pituitary Release Oxytocin and Vasopressin Directly Into the Blood

## Large neurons in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei form the magnocellular component of the

Figure 41–11 The paraventricular nucleus in the hypothalamus is

a microcosm of neuroendocrine, autonomic, and sensory-motor

integration.  The three structural-functional divisions of the paraven-

tricular nucleus are shown. The magnocellular neuroendocrine division comprises two distinct although partly interdigitated pools of neurons that normally release vasopressin (VAS) or oxytocin (OXY). Their axons course through the internal zone of the median eminence and terminate in the posterior pituitary. Two other populations of magnocellular vasopressin and oxytocin neurons lie in the supraoptic nucleus along the base of the brain. The parvocellular neuroendocrine division includes three major, separate (although partly interdigitated) pools of neurons that control anterior pituitary hormone secretion. Their axons end in the external zone of the median eminence, where they release their peptide

neurotransmitters—somatostatin (SS), growth hormone-inhibiting hormone (GIH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), or corticotropinreleasing hormone (CRH)—into the hypophysial portal veins. The descending division has three parts—dorsal (d), lateral (l), and ventral (v)—each comprising topographically organized conventional neurons that project to the brain stem and spinal cord. Their axons terminate in many parts of the central autonomic network in the brain

stem (Figure 41–10), the marginal zone (lamina I) of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and spinal trigeminal nucleus, and a number of regions in the brain stem reticular formation and periaqueductal gray matter. The descending division modulates autonomic outflow (and inflow), the inflow of nociceptive information, and eating and drinking behaviors. Appropriate integration of magnocellular neuroendocrine, parvocellular neuroendocrine, autonomic, and behavioral responses is mediated primarily by external inputs rather than by interneurons or extensive recurrent axon collaterals of projection neurons. Circulating steroid and thyroid hormones also produce selective effects on particular types of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1027


neuroendocrine motor system of the hypothalamus

(Figure 41–11). The magnocellular neurons send their

axons through the hypothalamo-hypophysial tract to

the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis (Figure 41–12). Approximately one-half of these neurons synthesize and secrete vasopressin (the antidiuretic hormone) into the general circulation; the other half synthesize and secrete oxytocin, a structurally similar hormone. Both hormones circulate to organs, where vasopressin controls blood pressure and water reabsorption by the kidney and oxytocin controls uterine smooth muscle and milk release. Vasopressin and oxytocin are nine-amino acid peptide hormones. Like other peptide hormones, they are synthesized in the cell body as larger prohormones

Paraventricular (Chapter 16) and then cleaved within Golgi transport vesicles before traveling down the axon to release sites in the posterior pituitary. The genes for these peptides have similar sequences and probably arose by duplication.

nucleus

Neuroendocrine

Parvocellular

Magnocellular

Brain stem and

spinal cord

<!-- image -->

10/12/20 8:03 AM
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

the anterior and posterior pituitary. The posterior

pituitary is an extension of the brain and contains

hormone-secreting axon terminals of hypothalamic

neurons. These terminals secrete vasopressin or oxytocin directly into the systemic circulation. The anterior pituitary, on the other hand, is entirely nonneuronal and is composed of five types of endocrine cells. Hormone secretion from these cells is controlled by stimulatory and inhibitory factors released by hypothalamic neurons into a specialized circulatory system that carries blood from the base of the brain (median eminence) to the anterior pituitary. Hypothalamic Axon Terminals in the Posterior Pituitary Release Oxytocin and Vasopressin Directly

Into the Blood

## Large neurons in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei form the magnocellular component of the

Figure 41–11 The paraventricular nucleus in the hypothalamus is

a microcosm of neuroendocrine, autonomic, and sensory-motor

integration.  The three structural-functional divisions of the paraven-

tricular nucleus are shown. The magnocellular neuroendocrine division comprises two distinct although partly interdigitated pools of neurons that normally release vasopressin (VAS) or oxytocin (OXY). Their axons course through the internal zone of the median eminence and terminate in the posterior pituitary. Two other populations of magnocellular vasopressin and oxytocin neurons lie in the supraoptic nucleus along the base of the brain. The parvocellular neuroendocrine division includes three major, separate (although partly interdigitated) pools of neurons that control anterior pituitary hormone secretion. Their axons end in the external zone of the median eminence, where they release their peptide

neurotransmitters—somatostatin (SS), growth hormone-inhibiting hormone (GIH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), or corticotropinreleasing hormone (CRH)—into the hypophysial portal veins. The descending division has three parts—dorsal (d), lateral (l), and ventral (v)—each comprising topographically organized conventional neurons that project to the brain stem and spinal cord. Their axons terminate in many parts of the central autonomic network in the brain

stem (Figure 41–10), the marginal zone (lamina I) of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and spinal trigeminal nucleus, and a number of regions in the brain stem reticular formation and periaqueductal gray matter. The descending division modulates autonomic outflow (and inflow), the inflow of nociceptive information, and eating and drinking behaviors. Appropriate integration of magnocellular neuroendocrine, parvocellular neuroendocrine, autonomic, and behavioral responses is mediated primarily by external inputs rather than by interneurons or extensive recurrent axon collaterals of projection neurons. Circulating steroid and thyroid hormones also produce selective effects on particular types of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1027


neuroendocrine motor system of the hypothalamus

(Figure 41–11). The magnocellular neurons send their

axons through the hypothalamo-hypophysial tract to

the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis (Figure 41–12). Approximately one-half of these neurons synthesize and secrete vasopressin (the antidiuretic hormone) into the general circulation; the other half synthesize and secrete oxytocin, a structurally similar hormone. Both hormones circulate to organs, where vasopressin controls blood pressure and water reabsorption by the kidney and oxytocin controls uterine smooth muscle and milk release. Vasopressin and oxytocin are nine-amino acid peptide hormones. Like other peptide hormones, they are synthesized in the cell body as larger prohormones

Paraventricular (Chapter 16) and then cleaved within Golgi transport vesicles before traveling down the axon to release sites in the posterior pituitary. The genes for these peptides have similar sequences and probably arose by duplication.

nucleus

Neuroendocrine

Parvocellular

Magnocellular

Brain stem and

spinal cord

<!-- image -->

10/12/20 8:03 AM


<!-- image -->

Pituitary stalk

Median eminence

Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

neurons that control anterior pituitary hormone

secretion (Figure 41–12). In the 1970s, Andrew

Schally, Roger Guillemin, and Wylie Vale determined

the structure of a group of hypothalamic peptide hormones that control pituitary hormone secretion from the five classic endocrine cell types in the anterior pituitary. These hormones, which are released into the median eminence by hypothalamic neurons, fall into two classes: releasing hormones and releaseinhibiting hormones. Only one anterior pituitary hormone, prolactin, is under predominantly inhibitory control (mediated by dopamine). The parvocellular neuroendocrine motor zone of the hypothalamus is centered along the wall of the third ventricle (Figure 41–2A) and contains neu-

Inferior hypophysial

Neurohypophysis (Posterior pituitary) rons that project to and release their hormones into the median eminence. The parvocellular neurons releasing gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) are atypical in that they are scattered in a continuum extending from the medial septum through to the mediobasal hypothalamus. They are controlled by upstream neurons that release kisspeptin. The remaining parvocellular neuroendocrine neurons lie within the paraventricular and arcuate nuclei and the short periventricular region between them (Figures 41–2 and 41–11). Distinct pools of neurons in and around the paraventricular nucleus release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), or

neurons. Neurons in the magnocellular neuroendocrine sys-

tem (blue) send their axons directly to the posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis) where they release the peptides vasopressin and oxytocin into the general circulation. Neurons in the parvocellular neuroendocrine system (yellow) send their axons to the hypophysial portal system in the median eminence and pituitary stalk. Portal veins transport hypothalamic hormones (peptides and dopamine) to the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis) where they increase the release of hormones from five classic types of endocrine cells (Figure 41–11). The output of neuroendocrine neurons is regulated in large part by inputs from other regions of the brain. (Adapted from Reichlin 1978, and Gay 1972.)

Endocrine Cells in the Anterior Pituitary Secrete

Hormones in Response to Specific Factors Released

by Hypothalamic Neurons somatostatin (or growth hormone release-inhibiting hormone) (Figure 41–11). The CRH neurons control the release of anterior pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which in turn controls the release of cortisol (glucocorticoids) from the adrenal cortex. Thus, this pool of CRH neurons is the "final common pathway" for all centrally mediated glucocorticoid stress hormonal responses. The arcuate nucleus contains two pools of parvocellular neuroendocrine neurons. One group releases growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) and the other dopamine, which inhibits prolactin secretion. Some of the dopaminergic neurons are distributed dorsally as far as the paraventricular nucleus. The axons of all these parvocellular neuroendocrine neurons travel in the hypothalamo-hypophysial tract and end in the specialized proximal end of the

## In the 1950s, Geoffrey Harris proposed that the anterior pituitary, or adenohypophysis, is regulated indirectly by the hypothalamus. He showed that the

hypophysial portal veins, which carry blood from the hypothalamic median eminence to the anterior pituitary, transport factors released from hypothalamic

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1028

pituitary stalk, the median eminence (Figure 41–12). There, in a region of capillary loops in the external zone of the median eminence, the axon terminals release the various hypophysiotropic factors. While the median eminence is within the brain, it is considered outside the blood–brain barrier. This is due to the fenestrated nature of the median eminence

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

Table 41–3 Hypothalamic Substances That Release or

Inhibit the Release of Anterior Pituitary Hormones

Hypothalamic substance Anterior pituitary hormone

Releasing:

| Thyrotropin-releasing  hormone (TRH)  (PRL)  Corticotropin-releasing  hormone (CRH)  Adrenocorticotropin  (ACTH), β-lipotropin  Gonadotropin-releasing  hormone (GnRH)  (FSH)  Growth hormone–releasing  hormone (GHRH or GRH)  Growth hormone (GH)  Inhibiting:  Prolactin release-inhibiting  hormone (PIH), dopamine  Prolactin  Growth hormone release-  inhibiting hormone (GIH or  GHRIH; somatostatin)  Growth hormone,  thyrotropin   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Thyrotropin (TSH), prolactin

Luteinizing hormone (LH),

follicle-stimulating hormone

capillaries, which allow diffusion of the hypophysi-

otropic factors into the portal circulation. The median

eminence capillary loops are the proximal end of the

hypophysial portal system of veins that carry the factors to the anterior pituitary, where they act on cognate receptors on the five types of endocrine cells (Figure 41–12 and Table 41–3).

Dedicated Hypothalamic Systems Control

Specific Homeostatic Parameters

## Body Temperature Is Controlled by Neurons in the Median Preoptic Nucleus

## Body Temperature Reflects the Balance Between Heat Production and Loss

The body generates heat through all of its exothermic biochemical reactions and ion fluxes. These processes

can be greatly increased above a baseline level, the rest-

ing metabolic rate, by exercise and shivering (both of which increase skeletal muscle heat production), by the digestion and assimilation of food (the so-called thermic effect of food), and by sympathetic stimulation of thermogenic activity in brown adipose tissue (Box 41–1). The body loses heat by radiation, convection, conduction (if immersed in cool water), and endothermic evaporation of either sweat from the skin or moisture

from the respiratory tract (a process augmented in some species by panting). The defensive reaction to cold, in addition to producing heat, involves sympathetically mediated cutaneous vasoconstriction and piloerection (goose bumps). By sending less blood to the skin, vasoconstriction conserves core temperature. Piloerection helps insulate the skin by creating a layer of motionless air near the skin's surface. Conversely, defenses against overheating include inhibition of sympathetic pathways that activate cutaneous vasodilation and brown adipose tissue. Voluntary behavioral responses like taking a swim or putting on a sweater play a particularly important role in thermoregulation.

Box 41–1 Brown Adipose Tissue, Bioenergetics, and Sympathetically Driven Thermogenesis

-

## Brown adipose tissue is a remarkably specialized heatproducing tissue that is especially abundant in newborns adipocytes. When activated, UCP1 "leaks" protons across the mitochondrial inner membrane into the mitochon

and small mammals, but is also found in adult humans.

It has a rich blood supply for delivery of fuel and oxygen and for removal of heat and is densely innervated by postganglionic sympathetic nerves. Brown adipocytes, the producers of heat, are found in concentrated deposits in and around the core and also as isolated cells within larger white adipose tissue depots. Sympathetic stimulation of β-adrenergic receptors activates uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1), a mitochondrial proton transport protein that is unique to brown

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1029

drial matrix, down the proton electrochemical gradient.

This uncouples mitochondrial respiration from adenosine triphosphate (ADP) availability, greatly increasing fuel oxidation and, importantly, the production of heat. Exercise and shivering, on the other hand, increase heat production by using adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to perform work. The resulting increase in ADP activates

proton transport into mitochondria via ATP synthase, which then increases coupled mitochondrial respiration, fuel oxidation, and ultimately the production of heat.


10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

They usually begin before the onset of physiologic

responses. Like thirst/drinking and hunger/eating,

activities generated in response to cold or hot chal-

lenges are motivated behaviors. Body Temperature Is Detected at Multiple Sites

Core temperature is held relatively constant. At the

## shell, on the other hand, temperature fluctuates extensively because the shell is adjacent to the external envi-

ronment, it has a high surface-to-mass ratio (in the case of limbs favoring heat loss over heat production), and thermal challenges dramatically affect its supply of warm blood (decreased when heat needs to be conserved; increased when heat needs to be lost). Most primary afferents that detect temperature have their cell bodies in the spinal dorsal root ganglia. Neurons that detect noxious temperatures are part of

the pain pathway (Chapter 20). Their function is to limit local tissue damage by promoting withdrawal as opposed to regulating body temperature. Neurons that respond to innocuous temperatures are often called thermoreceptors. Some thermoreceptor neurons have their endings in the skin, just below the epidermis, and these respond to shell temperature. They are predominantly, but not entirely, cold-responsive. Other thermoreceptor neurons have their endings in and around the large organs and respond to core temperature. They are also largely, but not entirely, cold-responsive. The fibers for the deep-tissue thermoreceptor neurons travel in the splanchnic nerves and, like the thermoreceptor neurons in the shell, have their cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia. In addition, some also travel in the vagal afferent nerve. Finally, there are warm-sensing neurons in the hypothalamic medial preoptic area. The molecular sensors utilized by thermoreceptor neurons for detecting changes in temperature are a subset of excitatory transient receptor potential (TRP)

channels. Different TRP channels respond to different ranges of temperatures (Chapter 20). Recent studies have implicated specific TRP channel types in various forms of sensing innocuous temperature in the three sites mentioned above: TRMP8 channels mediate coldsensing by shell thermoreceptor neurons, and TRPM2 channels mediate warm-sensing both by somatosensory thermoreceptor neurons and by neurons in the hypothalamic preoptic area. Multiple Thermoreceptor/Thermoeffector Loops Control Temperature

## Involuntary thermal regulation is controlled by a multisensor, multieffector thermoregulatory system.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1030

Thermal information from the shell and the viscera

ascends via primary afferents whose cell bodies are in

the dorsal root ganglia. They project to second-order

neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. These neurons project via the spinothalamic tract to the lateral parabrachial nucleus where neurons relay coldsensing and warm-sensing information to neurons in the hypothalamic MnPO. Activation of the cold-sensing or warm-sensing afferent pathways induces appropriate physiological responses aimed at increasing or decreasing body temperature. The neurons in the MnPO that indirectly respond to cold and warmth send efferent signals via relays through the medial preoptic area, dorsomedial hypo-

thalamus, and raphe pallidus in the ventral medulla, and from there on to the sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral nucleus of the spinal cord. These latter neurons excite postganglionic sympathetic neurons that project to blood vessels, sweat glands, and arrector muscles of hair follicles to control cutaneous blood flow, sweating, and piloerection, respectively, as well as to brown adipose tissue to control thermogenesis. In addition, cold causes shivering when gamma motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord are activated by excitatory neurons in the raphe pallidus (Chapter 32). The resultant contraction of intrafusal muscle fibers within muscle spindles activates IA afferents from the spindles to alpha motor neurons. This proprioceptive feedback increases activity of alpha motor neurons, as well as their propensity to undergo rhythmic bursts of activity, causing increased muscle tone and frank shivering. The neural pathways controlling voluntary thermoregulatory behaviors involve the same thermoreceptor pathways. Stimulation of warm-sensitive

neurons in and around the MnPO evokes dramatic cold-seeking behavior, decreases heat production, and increases heat loss. The conscious perception of body temperature relies upon the same first-order thermoreceptor neurons, but the afferent pathway diverges to activate second-order neurons in the dorsal horn, which project directly or indirectly to neurons in the ventromedial nucleus of the thalamus. These thalamic neurons project to the insular cortex. From the above discussion, it is clear that there is neither a set point for body temperature nor a "thermostat" that maintains it at 37°C. Instead, as mentioned

earlier, an apparent set point for body temperature emerges as a settling point controlled by multiple sensorymotor feedback loops containing thermoreceptors and thermoeffectors. It is a major achievement of evolution that this multicomponent afferent/efferent system is

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

so effective in keeping the temperature of the body

core remarkably constant.

Dysregulation of Circuits Controlling Temperature Causes Fever

## In the past, when the set point view of thermoregulation was dominant, fever was thought to be caused

by raising the body temperature set point—a view

that still persists in major medical textbooks. Based on the advances described above, fever is now thought to arise through modulation of the afferent/efferent loops, particularly as they traverse the hypothalamic preoptic area. Prostaglandin E2, generated by the action of inflammatory cytokines on endothelial cells in the preoptic area, inhibits warm-activated GABAergic neurons in the MnPO, thus disinhibiting the effector pathways that promote cutaneous vasoconstriction, brown adipose tissue thermogenesis, and shivering. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as aspirin, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen, reduce fever by inhibiting hypothalamic generation of prostaglandin E2. Water Balance and the Related Thirst Drive Are

Controlled by Neurons in the Vascular Organ of the

Lamina Terminalis, Median Preoptic Nucleus, and

## Subfornical Organ Changes in Blood Osmolarity Cause Cells to Shrink or Swell

Driven by osmosis, water moves freely across cell membranes. This has a number of important conse-

quences. First, because of its large size, the intracellular

compartment contains two-thirds of the body's water. Second, if blood osmolarity changes from its normal value (~290 mOsm/kg)—because water is gained by drinking or lost by renal excretion and by sweating, or because solutes have been added by eating (or by drinking, eg, sea water—1000 mOsm/kg)—water will move and the osmolarity of all compartments will equilibrate, including the intracellular one. Because the intracellular content of osmotically active molecules is relatively fixed over the short term, increases in blood osmolarity cause cells to shrink, and

conversely, decreases cause cells to swell. This is particularly dangerous for the brain because it is encased by the rigid skull. With extreme hyperosmolarity (too little water), the brain shrinks, pulling away from the skull and tearing blood vessels. With hypo-osmolarity (too much water), the brain swells, causing cerebral edema, seizures, and coma. To prevent such incidents, the brain acts to maintain normal osmolarity. It does

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1031


this by detecting changes in osmolarity and then regu-

lating the motivation to drink (thirst) and the kidney's

capacity to excrete water.

Osmolarity Is Affected When Water Is Lost or Gained and When Food Is Ingested

## Water is gained by drinking and, to a small degree, by the oxidation of fuel (fuel + O 2 → CO 2 + H 2 O). It is lost in a number of ways—by breathing (dry air in, humid-

ified air out), via the gastrointestinal tract (especially when diarrhea is present), by sweating, and by urination. Eating also increases blood osmolarity by moving water from the blood to the gut to aid digestion and by adding solutes to the bloodstream as food is broken down and absorbed. Because of these effects, there are significant interactions between neural systems that control hunger and thirst. For example, eating is such a significant

osmotic challenge that dehydration and its associated hyperosmolarity strongly suppress hunger (dehydration-induced anorexia). Conversely, the act of eating itself, even in an individual with normal water content, rapidly stimulates thirst so as to mitigate the anticipated, eating-induced increase in osmolarity. Vasopressin Released From the Posterior Pituitary Regulates Renal Water Excretion

## The ability of the kidney to excrete water is tightly controlled by vasopressin. When it is absent, humans can

excrete up to approximately 900 mL/h of urine, and

when it is at maximal levels, humans excrete as little as approximately 15 mL/h. Vasopressin decreases water excretion by increasing its reabsorption from urine by the kidney. Osmolarity Is Detected by Osmoreceptor Neurons

The brain maintains water balance by monitoring sen-

## sory input from osmoreceptors—sensory neurons that respond to osmolarity—which reflects the body's state

of hydration. Osmoreceptor neurons are found in the periphery and on neurons in and around the hypothalamus. The central osmoreceptors monitor systemic osmolarity, while the peripheral osmoreceptors monitor osmolarity in and around the gut and related structures. Peripheral Osmoreceptors Allow Changes in Systemic Osmolarity to Be Anticipated

## Sensory information about peripheral osmolarity enables the brain to make preemptive changes in thirst

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

and vasopressin secretion that anticipate and miti-

gate future shifts in systemic osmolarity, such as the

decrease that occurs with drinking or the increase that

occurs with eating. Such regulation serves to prevent overshooting normal osmolarity, which would otherwise occur when previously ingested water, which has not yet affected systemic osmolarity, is slowly absorbed from the gut. Indeed, when a dehydrated, hyperosmolar individual ingests water, thirst and vasopressin secretion rapidly decrease, well before systemic osmolarity falls. The identity of peripheral osmoreceptors is unknown. Central Osmoreceptors and the Afferent/Efferent Circuits Control Water Balance

## Three nuclei in the lamina terminalis, which forms the anterior wall of the third ventricle, play a key role in

detecting and in responding to disturbances in systemic

osmolarity (Figure 41–13). From ventral to dorsal, they are the OVLT, the MnPO, and the SFO. The OVLT and SFO are circumventricular organs, and like the previously discussed median eminence, they lie outside the blood–brain barrier. Because of this, neurons in these

Blood

<!-- image -->

section through the rat brain. Information from baroreceptors in

the circulatory system and from sensory receptors in the mouth, throat, and viscera is conveyed to the nucleus of the solitary tract and neighboring structures in the caudal brain stem through the glossopharyngeal (IX) and vagal (X) nerves. The hormone angiotensin II (ANG II) provides the brain with an additional signal concerning low blood volume. Circulating angiotensin II is sensed by

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1032

two nuclei can rapidly detect changes in blood osmo-

larity as well as blood-borne circulating factors that are

unable to cross the blood–brain barrier (an important

example being angiotensin II). Consistent with this arrangement, osmoreceptor neurons in the OVLT and SFO make extensive connec -tions to neurons in the MnPO. While MnPO neurons

themselves do not directly sense osmolarity, they are indirectly responsive to osmolarity via relays from the OVLT and SFO. While all neurons in the OVLT and SFO appear to be dedicated to the regulation of water balance, some neurons in the MnPO are involved in regulation of body temperature (as noted earlier), cardiovascular function, and sleep. Regulation of water balance or body temperature is carried out by subsets of modality-specific neurons in the MnPO. Neurons from all three lamina terminalis nuclei send dense excitatory projections to secretory vasopressin neurons in the paraventricular hypothalamic

nucleus (PVH) and supraoptic nucleus. As described below, these three lamina terminalis nuclei are also able to cause thirst. Central osmoreceptors, and probably also peripheral osmoreceptors, detect changes in osmolarity by

Sensory signals

from mouth,

throat, and viscera

Cranial nerves

IX, X

of the hypothalamus (PVH), supraoptic nucleus (SON), and the

vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT). The osmolality of the blood is sensed by receptors in and near the OVLT that project to the MnPO, PVH, and SON. Neurosecretory cells in the PVH and SON nuclei trigger release of vasopressin from the posterior pituitary, thus decreasing water excretion by the kidney. (Adapted, with permission, from Swanson 2000.)

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

responding to changes in cell volume. Shrinking or

swelling, which increases or decreases, respectively,

their cation permeability, causes increases or decreases

in firing rate. Decreased intravascular volume—for example, that due to acute blood loss—also potently stimulates thirst and vasopressin secretion. Low blood volume is

detected by the kidney, which increases its secretion of renin. Renin is a protease that converts circulating angiotensinogen to angiotensin I (ANG I). ANG I is then further cleaved by angiotensin-converting enzyme in the lung, generating angiotensin II (ANG II). ANG II excites SFO neurons that directly, and also via a relay in the MnPO, drive vasopressin neurons and presumptive thirst neurons. Thirst Is Controlled by Neurons in the OVLT, MnPO, and SFO

## As with vasopressin secretion, all three lamina terminalis structures participate in generating the moti-

vational state of thirst, the desire to seek and ingest

water. Lesion of all three structures completely blocks dehydration- and ANG II–induced thirst, as well as secretion of vasopressin. Electrical stimulation of these structures, on the other hand, elicits drinking. Activation of excitatory glutamatergic neurons in the SFO and MnPO induces intense drinking in an otherwise water-satiated mouse within seconds. Thus, excitatory neurons in the SFO and MnPO, and likely also in the OVLT, have a remarkable capacity to induce thirst. Importantly, the behavior induced

is specific—only water drinking occurs. Notably, the excitatory SFO neurons driving this behavior are the same subset of SFO neurons that are activated by dehydration and that express ANG II receptors. The downstream pathway by which these neurons stimulate thirst is presently unknown. The activity of both the thirst neurons in the SFO and vasopressin neurons in the SON and PVH decreases or increases rapidly in response to sensory cues, such as

drinking or eating, respectively, that anticipate future homeostatic disturbances. This rapid regulation occurs independent of any changes in systemic osmolarity and is therefore independent of feedback; hence, it is an example of feedforward control. The likely function of this feedforward regulation is to anticipate disturbances, institute preemptive corrective actions, and thus greatly reduce or eliminate their impact. In summary, years of research have led to a clear model. Dehydration (water deficiency) increases the activity of neurons in the SFO and OVLT, and in the

MnPO via relays from the SFO and OVLT, and this

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1033


increase in activity enhances thirst and vasopressin

secretion. As we shall see, a similar general system,

but with different neural structures, controls caloric

deficiency–based regulation of hunger and energy metabolism. Energy Balance and the Related Hunger Drive Are Controlled by Neurons in the Arcuate Nucleus

## As with temperature and water balance, energy balance is regulated by feedback signals from the body that modulate activity of key hypothalamic neurons,

which then initiate adaptive changes in both physiology and behavior. Regulation of energy balance differs, however, in important ways. First, the feedback signals monitored are numerous and, in many cases, only very indirectly related to the key parameter, energy balance. Examples of this feed-

back include neural and hormonal signals from the gut, leptin from adipocytes, insulin from pancreatic beta cells, and metabolite levels in the blood. This is in striking contrast to the single, directly sensed signals monitored for thermoregulation and water balance. Second, energy can be stored as fat. The amount of energy that can be accumulated is remarkably high, so high that the energy needs of a starving person can be met for more than a month. Heat and water, in contrast, are not stored. Thus, organisms have an "energy buffer" that allows survival during prolonged deficiency. Third, since storage has benefits, regulation of energy balance, as opposed to temperature and water balance, is asymmetric in that low energy stores are

defended against very aggressively, while high stores are defended against only very weakly—hence the high prevalence of obesity in societies with calorically dense, palatable food. Fourth, energy storage can be a liability—when excessive, it promotes diseases such as obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. Finally, in circuits regulating energy balance, neuropeptides play a remarkably important role. Fat Is Stored When Intake of Energy Exceeds Expenditure

Consistent with the first law of thermodynamics, the

## calories that are stored as fat equal the number of calories ingested minus calories expended. While there is

only one way to gain energy—by eating—there are many ways to expend energy. Most energy is expended by biochemical reactions that are required for basic life functions. As these processes are constantly in operation, such "obliga-

tory energy expenditure" is fixed and not regulated. Two other types of energy expenditure, however,

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

are dramatically different; one is voluntary physical

activity, while the other is involuntary, resulting from

sympathetic stimulation of brown adipose tissue and

shivering. Sympathetically controlled energy expenditure, often referred to as adaptive thermogenesis, is controlled by the brain. Its function is to respond to perturbations in temperature and in energy stores. The Intake and Expenditure of Energy Are Usually Matched

For most individuals, body fat stores are relatively con-

## stant over time. Thus, calories ingested roughly equal calories expended. A simple calculation demonstrates

this point. An average middle-aged person expends 3,392 kcal per day (kcal corresponds to the common term "calorie"). Over the course of a year, this typical person gains 350 g of fat (which equates to 9 kcal of fat per day). Thus, on average, 9 kcal extra must have been consumed per day to account for this gain. This is the amount of energy found in 4% of a typical candy bar or expended by walking about 150 meters. Thus, the mismatch between intake and expenditure (9 kcal) is tiny—only 0.27% of total energy expenditure. Such close matching is the result of powerful homeostatic mechanisms that use feedback from the body to regulate intake and expenditure. As is true

for regulation of temperature and osmolarity, the constancy of body weight, and the close matching between intake and expenditure, is unrelated to any specific "set point." Instead, this remarkable control is the emergent settling point of multiple afferent/efferent feedback loops. Obesity Is Caused by Genes and Recent Lifestyle Changes

Dysregulation of the above-mentioned afferent/efferent

## feedback loops results in obesity. While some cases of obesity are due to known mutations in genes required

for homeostatic regulation, most are of undetermined cause. Of these, many are likely due to multiple mutations, many of which are uncharacterized. Because the incidence of obesity in Western societies has increased greatly in recent years, too fast to be due to new mutations, changes in diet and physical activity must also play an important role. Homeostatic systems that evolved to achieve energy balance in hunter-gatherers are likely overwhelmed by abundant, palatable, calorically dense food. But even in our modern obesogenic environment, there are still large variations in fat stores: Only 41% to 70% of interindividual variation in fat stores can

be attributed to genetic factors. Thus, genetic predisposition and environment together cause obesity. Of

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1034

interest, many of the predisposing genetic loci identi-

fied to date involve genes that affect brain function.

Multiple Afferent Signals Control Appetite

The major afferent signals affecting energy balance can

## be divided into two major categories. (1) Short-term signals from cells that line the gastrointestinal tract

During

report the status of food in the gut. All but one of these signals increase with eating and function to terminate meals; the exception is ghrelin, which increases with fasting and stimulates hunger. (2) Longer-term signals report the status of energy reserves (ie, fat stores). These include the pancreatic hormone insulin and the adipocyte hormone leptin, both of which are released in proportion to fat stores. Their levels, especially that of leptin, inform the brain whether fat stores are adequate (Figure 41–14A). Signals From the Gut Trigger Meal Termination. eating, as food enters the stomach and intestine, physi-

cal distention increases firing of stretch-sensitive vagal

afferents. In addition, chemodetection of food by intestinal endocrine cells stimulates secretion of hormones such as cholecystokinin (CCK), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and peptide YY (PYY). These responses have three primary functions. First, they cause contraction of the pyloric sphincter, a valve between the stomach and intestine. This limits further passage of food, preventing the small

intestine from being overloaded. Second, the intestinal hormones stimulate secretion of bile and enzymes into the intestinal lumen to aid digestion. Third, the vagal afferents and the intestinal hormones decrease subse -quent food intake, bringing about meal termination (satiation). The intestinal hormones accomplish this primarily by stimulating local vagal afferent terminals, which in turn excite neurons in the caudal region of the NTS. Two of these hormones, GLP-1 and PYY, may also directly stimulate neurons in the brain. The activated neurons in the NTS project directly, or via a relay in

the lateral parabrachial nucleus, to neurons in the forebrain, including the amygdala and hypothalamus. Neurons in the lateral parabrachial nucleus that express calcitonin gene-related polypeptide (CGRP) are one such important relay involved in satiation. These circuits then bring about meal termination. When food is absorbed, the increase in blood glucose stimulates β-cells to release insulin and the hormone amylin. Amylin then excites neurons in the

area postrema (a circumventricular organ outside the blood–brain barrier, located just above the NTS).

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

Circulating amylin increases within minutes following

a meal, decreasing subsequent food intake.

Ghrelin is released by endocrine cells in the stom-

ach. Unlike the factors described above, its secretion is high before eating and falls during the meal. It may

play a role in meal initiation. Indeed, ghrelin is the only known systemic factor that increases hunger and thus eating. It excites neurons in a number of sites, including agouti-related peptide neurons in the arcuate nucleus (see below). The physiological significance of ghrelin is unclear because deletion of its gene does not appear to affect hunger. Blood Glucose and Insulin Affect Appetite. sensed by neurons in the periphery, hindbrain, and


intense hyperphagia and reduced brown fat thermo-

genesis. Based on a series of parabiosis experiments,

Douglas Coleman proposed that ob/ob mice lack a

circulating satiety factor and that db/db mice lack its receptor. In a tour-de-force positional cloning effort led by Jeffrey Friedman and Rudolph Leibel, the ob gene was localized on a small region on chromosome 6. Fried-

hypothalamus. Although glucose sensing does not

appear to play a role in the day-to-day regulation of energy balance, the detection of and response to dangerously low blood glucose levels (glucopenia) is an important function of the brain. Two adaptive responses are initiated: (1) intense glucoprivic hunger, due at least in part to indirect activation of agouti-related peptide neurons, and (2) secretion of glucagon, epinephrine, and corticosteroids, which stimulate hepatic glucose production. The hormonal responses are caused by increases in sympathetic outflow as well as activation of the CRH pathway associated with stress (Chapter 61). Amino acids also can be sensed and, consequently, regulate energy balance and dietary choice—the latter to ensure ingestion of sufficient quantity and quality of protein. Insulin, on the other hand, is thought to signal an increase in fat stores. Insulin's primary function is to control blood glucose, the stimulus for its secretion.

Glucose is man and his lab then homed in on and identified the ob gene. Renamed the leptin gene, it encodes leptin, a 167-amino acid protein secreted by adipocytes in proportion to the size of fat stores. Treating ob/ob mice with leptin cures their obesity. The db gene was identified a few years later, and as predicted by Coleman, it turned out to encode leptin's receptor and was found to be expressed by neurons in the hypothalamus. It is an interleukin-6–type class I cytokine receptor that produces its antiobesity effects by activating the JAK2/ STAT3 signaling pathway. Much has been learned subsequently about leptin. First, humans with a genetic deficiency of leptin or its receptor, like the mutant mice, are massively obese;

Insulin lowers blood glucose by driving it into muscle and fat cells and by decreasing its production by the liver. As fat stores increase, its ability to do this is decreased (a phenomenon called insulin resistance). Thus, higher fat stores increase basal and mealstimulated insulin secretion in an effort to overcome resistance and normalize glucose. The fat store–mediated increase in insulin levels inhibits neurons in the hypothalamus, especially the arcuate nucleus, which is thought to decrease hunger. The Fat Cell Hormone Leptin Signals the Brain About Fat Stores and Affects Hunger and Energy Expenditure.

hence, leptin's function is highly conserved, and such mutations are extremely rare. Second, humans with common forms of obesity have very high circulating levels of leptin, a by-product of their increased fat stores. This finding initially led to the view, later questioned, that "garden variety" obesity is caused by resistance to leptin action. Third, starvation, which reduces fat stores, drastically decreases leptin levels. This reduction is of interest because fasting causes many adaptive responses that are also seen in mice and humans that lack leptin: hunger, low energy expenditure, decreased fertility, and other altered neuroendocrine responses. Indeed, restoration of normal leptin levels in fasted individuals reverses or ameliorates many of fasting's effects. Thus, leptin's primary function is to signal, when its levels are low, that fat stores are inadequate. These low leptin levels then bring about key adaptive responses such as increased hunger, decreased sympathetically mediated thermogenesis (to conserve

1949, scientists at the Jackson Laboratory in Maine

noted the appearance of "some very plump young mice." This obesity was due to a genetic mutation, which they named obese (ob). Sixteen years later, they identified another obesity mutation, diabetes (db). The extreme obesity of ob/ob and db/db mice results from

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1035

In limited fuel stores), decreased fertility (to prevent pregnancy when its demands cannot be met), and others. According to this view, leptin's dynamic range for signaling extends from the very low levels seen with fasting, signaling that fat stores are too low, to the levels found in well-fed, nonobese individuals, signaling that fat stores are sufficient. Levels above this may produce some effect to restrain obesity, but this effect, if present, is remarkably weak. Thus, the defense of energy balance is asymmetric—strong against low stores, weak against high stores. A corollary of this is that obese individuals do not have leptin resistance;

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A Maintenance of energy balance

<!-- image -->

Hypothalamus

GABA

Arcuate

nucleus

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1036

PVH satiety neuron

– +

MC4R

NPY

AgRP

αMSH

AgRP POMC VGLUT2

Hunger Satiety

promoting promoting Glutamate Cervical spine Blood

10/12/20 8:03 AM
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A Maintenance of energy balance

<!-- image -->

Hypothalamus

GABA

Arcuate

nucleus

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1036

PVH satiety neuron

– +

MC4R

NPY

AgRP

αMSH

AgRP POMC VGLUT2

Hunger Satiety

promoting promoting Glutamate Cervical spine Blood

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

rather, they simply have leptin levels that exceed the

maximally effective concentration.

POMC, AgRP, and MC4R Neurons Are Key Nodes in the Afferent/Efferent Loop

## Neuron-specific manipulation technologies have revealed two antagonistic populations of neurons in the arcuate nucleus that control energy balance: one

expresses agouti-related peptide (AgRP) and the other the precursor polypeptide proopiomelanocortin (POMC) (Figure 41–14B). POMC neurons decrease hunger and stimulate sympathetically driven energy expenditure; AgRP neurons do the opposite. POMC neurons release the processed peptide α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (αMSH), which activates the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R), a G protein–coupled receptor. The downstream MC4R-expressing neurons that control hunger lie within the PVH. When these MC4R neurons are excited by αMSH released from POMC

afferents, hunger is decreased. The PVH-MC4R "satiety neurons" are glutamatergic; they decrease hunger via their excitatory projections to the lateral parabrachial nucleus. The MC4R-expressing neurons that control energy expenditure are sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord. POMC neurons project to these sites,

in addition to the PVH, increasing sympathetically driven energy expenditure. The AgRP neurons increase hunger in part by opposing the actions of POMC neurons (Figure 41–14B). They release three factors: AgRP, an inverse agonist of

Figure 41–14 (Opposite) Neural and endocrine components

combine to regulate energy balance.

A. Short-term signals. During meals, cholecystokinin (CCK)

from the intestinal tract stimulates sensory fibers of the vagus nerve, thus promoting satiation (meal termination). Glucagon-

like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY), also released by the intestinal tract, appear to work on both sensory fibers of the vagus and neurons in the brain. The vagal sensory fibers, along with sympathetic fibers from the gut and orosensory information, converge in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS). Prior to mealtime, release of ghrelin from the stomach peaks, providing a blood-borne signal to neurons in the brain. Whereas CCK promotes satiety, ghrelin promotes eating. Long-term signals. Leptin and insulin are among the humoral signals that inform the brain about the status of the fat stores. Leptin is produced in fat-storing cells, whereas insulin is produced in the pancreas. Both hormones are sensed by recep-

tors in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus as well as by receptors in the NTS. Leptin and insulin reduce food intake and increase energy expenditure. (Abbreviation: SNS, sympathetic nervous system.)

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1037


MC4R, and neuropeptide Y and γ-aminobutyric acid

(GABA), two inhibitory transmitters. The AgRP neu-

rons project to and inhibit the PVH-MC4R satiety neu-

rons and directly inhibit POMC neurons. In addition, different subsets of arcuate AgRP neurons project to other sites, including the lateral hypothalamus and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. These sites, when inhibited by AgRP inputs, can also stimulate hunger. A third group of neurons in the arcuate nucleus express VGLUT2, release glutamate, and act in parallel with POMC neurons to induce satiety (Figure 41–14B).

Like POMC neurons, and opposite to AgRP neurons, they excite the PVH-MC4R satiety neurons. αMSH/ MC4R signaling in PVH-MC4R neurons causes satiety by two mechanisms: by directly activating the PVHMC4R satiety neurons and by upregulating excitatory transmission from the VGLUT2 neurons to the PVHMC4R neurons via postsynaptic facilitation. The importance of the POMC, AgRP, and PVHMC4R satiety neurons in regulating food intake is supported by a number of compelling findings. First,

fasting activates AgRP neurons and inhibits POMC neurons, while feeding or leptin treatment does the opposite. The downstream PVH-MC4R satiety neurons are inhibited by fasting and excited by feeding. Second, genetic deficiency of the POMC protein or MC4R causes massive obesity. Third, genetic ablation of AgRP neurons in mice causes starvation, while stimulation of AgRP neurons rapidly brings about extreme hyperphagia, even in mice that are calorically replete and otherwise sated. Finally, several findings implicate the PVH-MC4R satiety neurons as an important

B. Neurons in the arcuate nucleus that synthesize agouti-

related peptide (AgRP), proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and

vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2) project to the

paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) where they control hunger and satiety. Satiety-promoting POMC neurons release the processed POMC peptide, α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (αMSH), which binds to melanocortin-4 receptors (MC4R) on neurons in the PVH. Activation of these neurons causes satiety. In contrast, the hunger-promoting AgRP neurons release two inhibitory transmitters, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and neuropeptide Y (NPY), and the MC4R antagonist AgRP. Their combined effect is to inhibit the MC4R-expressing neurons, causing hunger. The MC4R-expressing neurons also receive direct excitatory input from another population of arcuate neurons, VGLUT2 neurons, which also promote satiety. The binding of αMSH to MC4R causes satiety by two mechanisms: by directly activating the PVH-MC4R neurons and by upregulating excitatory transmission from the arcuate VGLUT2 neurons to the PVH-MC4R neurons (blue arrows). Finally, PVH-MC4R neurons project to the lateral parabrachial nucleus where they promote satiety.

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

downstream target of AgRP and POMC neurons.

Most notable are the development of marked hyper-

phagia and obesity in mice genetically engineered to

lack MC4R neurons in the PVH and the induction of intense feeding following optogenetic stimulation of AgRP terminals in the PVH, which inhibits the satiety neurons. Surprisingly, environmental cues that predict future ingestion of food induce inhibition of AgRP neurons. Indeed, in fasted mice, which have high

AgRP neuron activity, presentation of food alone without ingestion decreases AgRP neuron firing. This is roughly analogous to rapid, feedforward inhibition of vasopressin secretion and thirst neuron activity (mentioned previously). Thus, in addition to receiving strong bottom-up feedback signals from the body, the hunger-promoting AgRP neurons also receive topdown feedforward information from the environment. The function of this input is not yet clear, but it could serve as an anticipatory signal to limit future ingestion of excessive calories, or as discussed below, it could serve as a reward-related signal to motivate feeding. Finally, the complete pathway accounting for regulation of hunger by the AgRP and POMC neuron → PVH pathway is presently unknown. It is likely that,

via relays through a number of synapses, it affects neuronal activity in pathways controlling reward as well as perception. This is the case because, in the fasted state, food and cues predictive of food are both more rewarding and much more likely to become the focus of attention. How specificity for a given goal—in this case food—is retained as neural information flows from the highly specific deficiency-regulated homeostatic neurons in the hypothalamus to the "nonspecific" reward and perception pathways in the accumbens and cortex is one of the great mysteries of motivated behaviors such as hunger and thirst. The solution could provide clues for disorders of motivated behavior like drug addiction. Psychological Concepts Are Used to Explain Motivational

Drives Such as Hunger

In a simplified stimulus–response view of behavior, one might assume that neural detection of water or energy deficiency (the stimulus) is hardwired to motor

pathways for drinking or eating (the response), and thus analogous to the knee-jerk stretch reflex (Chapter 3). However, this cannot be the case because the responses that can be employed to obtain food, all motivated by the deficiency stimulus, are remarkably varied and complex—to such a degree that they could not be hardwired. Indeed, animals can complete an infinite

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1038

number of complex operant learning tasks to obtain

water or food rewards.

The challenge to understanding motivational

drive is to devise a model that accounts for the ability of deprivation states to induce behavior that is remark-

ably varied and complex, while remaining completely specific for one goal. Two compelling theories are relevant. According to incentive motivation theory, deficiency increases the reward value of food and water. Drive reduction theory posits that deficiency generates an aversive state, the resolution of which is thought to motivate behavior. Notably, these two views are not mutually exclusive and may in some ways be two sides of the same coin. Incentive Motivation: Fasting Increases the Reward Value of Food. The incentive motivation theory is the work

of theorists over many years, most recently refined

by Frederick Toates and Kent Berridge. Consider eating and the hunger drive. Briefly, food is viewed as inherently rewarding. Through learned associations, cues and tasks related to obtaining food also become rewarding; in this way, varied and complex behavioral responses are learned (Figure 41–15A). The theory posits that the deprivation state increases the reward value of food and of the related cues and tasks (ie, their incentive salience). Thus,

during fasting, the reward value is increased, and all food and cues and tasks related to food are extremely rewarding. After a meal, the reward value is decreased, and only the most inherently palatable foods, for example, ice cream, are still sufficiently rewarding to be eaten. The task of neuroscientists is to determine how deprivation increases reward value. Experimental activation of AgRP neurons in an otherwise sated mouse dramatically increases the reward value of food— remarkably, the reward value of food is increased to the same extremely high level seen with fasting. Drive Reduction: Activity of AgRP Hunger Neurons Can Be Aversive. As we know from personal experience, the

behavioral states created by dehydration and caloric

-

deficiency, namely thirst and hunger, are unpleasant. It was originally proposed many years ago that reduction of these states, which relieves this discomfort, is rewarding and hence motivates drinking and feeding. Recently, Scott Sternson's group has provided compelling new support for a modified version of this model (Figure 41–15B). Using a behavioral conditioning paradigm such as the place preference test, they discovered that optogenetic activation of AgRP neurons in sated mice was aversive. When the same mice were then stud ied in a food-deprived state (which is associated with

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

A Incentive motivation

Caloric deciency Reward value AgRP neurons

<!-- image -->

different foods have different reward values (lettuce–low, ice

cream–high). Through learned associations, cues that predict

food become rewarding. The fed (sated) versus fasted state sets the gain determining how rewarding food and food cues are. Fasting greatly increases while the sated state decreases reward value. increased AgRP neuron activity), they engaged in behav-

iors that in the earlier conditioning had lowered AgRP

neuron activity—in short, they acted as if motivated to

turn off the AgRP neuron–induced aversive state. Similar results were obtained with thirst neurons in the SFO. In further support of this view, optogenetic activation of downstream PVH-MC4R satiety neurons in calorically deprived mice, but not in sated mice, is

emotionally positive (ie, the mice like it). Thus, causing satiety when otherwise hungry is pleasant. In total, these findings provide strong evidence for the view that homeostatic deficiency is unpleasant, that the aversive state is caused by activation of deficiency-responsive homeostatic neurons, and that when afflicted by the deficiency-induced aversive state animals engage in behaviors that they associate with relief. This model provides an explanation for why dieting is so difficult. It generates an aversive, unpleasant

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1039

Behavior

Seeking food

Eating

Hunger

Rewarding

B. Drive reduction. The feeling of hunger is aversive. Eating

reduces this aversive state. Consistent with this theory, experi-

mental stimulation of hunger-promoting agouti-related peptide

- (AgRP) neurons is aversive, while stimulation of satiety-promoting paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus melanocortin-4 receptors (MC4R) neurons (which are downstream of the AgRP and proopiomelanocortin [POMC] neurons) in an otherwise hungry mouse creates a pleasant feeling. state that can only be relieved by eating. Finally, the

rapid reduction in AgRP neuron activity in response

to sensory cues that predict food, and the alleviation

of the aversive state that this should cause, could function as a rewarding "teaching signal" that motivates pursuit of the goal (food).

Sexually Dimorphic Regions in the

Hypothalamus Control Sex, Aggression, and

Parenting

## Now we turn to behaviors that are not homeostatic, but are controlled by the hypothalamus, involve inte-

gration between sensory cues and signals from the

body (ie, gonadal steroids), and are critical for survival of the species.

10/12/20 8:03 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Males and females differ in their sexual, aggres-

sive, and parenting behaviors. These differences are

especially notable in animals, for example in mice,

where they are clearly hardwired (ie, require no prior training). These differences include mounting and lordosis by males and females, respectively; territorialrelated behaviors such as marking and aggression by males; and the tendency toward nurturing in females versus aggressive behavior in males when dealing with the young. The latent capacity for these sexually dimorphic behaviors is the product of sex steroid action on the brain during embryogenesis (Chapter 51). Full actualization of adult sex-specific behaviors also requires adult levels of gonadal steroids. Sex chromosome–specific genes, other than Sry , w which causes male sex determination, as well as genes that are imprinted in a sexually dimorphic way, also subtly modulate sexspecific behaviors independent of gonadal steroids. Ultimately, the behaviors themselves are triggered by cues from the environment, such as pheromones. Two regions of the hypothalamus are critically involved in the control of these behaviors, the POA and the ventral lateral aspect of the ventromedial hypotha-

lamic nucleus (vlVMH). Both sites are sexually dimorphic: The POA contains more neurons in males, and the vlVMH contains more progesterone-expressing neurons in females. These sites are heavily interconnected, and they receive strong input from two other sexually dimorphic areas outside the hypothalamus: the medial division of the posteromedial bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNSTmpm) and medial amyg- dala (MeA).

Sexual Behavior and Aggression Are Controlled by the Preoptic Hypothalamic Area and a Subarea of

the Ventromedial Hypothalamic Nucleus

## Brain lesion studies have demonstrated that the sexu -ally dimorphic brain regions—the accessory olfactory bulb, BNSTmpm, MeA, and particularly POA

and vlVMH—play important roles in sex-specific behaviors. Neurons in these regions are highly interconnected, are downstream of pathways involved in detecting and responding to pheromones (BNSTmpm and MeA), express sex hormone receptors, and, with the exception of neurons in the vlVMH, also express aromatase (Figure 41–16). Neurons in both the POA and vlVMH send strong projections to the lateral periaqueductal gray area, which is thought to mediate and coordinate the motor and autonomic aspects of sexual and aggressive behavior. The vlVMH plays a critical role in controlling sexually dimorphic behaviors. Firing rates of vlVMH neurons in male mice increase during mating or peri-

ods of aggression toward a male intruder. Stimulation of these neurons triggers intense attack behavior toward intruder males and toward atypical targets for male aggression such as castrated males, females, or even rubber gloves! Silencing these neurons eliminates aggressive behavior toward male intruders.

aromatase. (Abbreviations: BNSTmpm, medial division

of the posteromedial bed nucleus of the stria terminalis;

<!-- image -->

lamic and amygdalar nuclei that regulate sexually dimorphic

behaviors are extensively interconnected. These areas process pheromonal information, and subsets of adult neurons within each of these regions express sex hormone receptors; neurons within some of these regions (blue) also express

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1040

MeA, medial amygdala; PAG, periaqueductal gray; PMV

,

ventral premammillary nucleus; POA, preoptic hypothalamus; VMHvl, ventrolateral component of the ventromedial hypothalamus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Yang and Shah 2014. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc.)

10/12/20 8:03 AM

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival

Furthermore, stimulation of a subset of vlVMH neu

-

rons that express estrogen receptor evokes either sex-

ual behavior (mounting) or aggression, depending on


Feedback loops that sense temperature, osmo-

larity, blood pressure, and body fat are essential

for homeostatic control. The combined action of

- -multiple feedback-informed sensory-afferent/ efferent-effector control loops results in emergent settling points. 4. Modality-specific hypothalamic neurons link specific interoceptive sensory feedback with outputs that control adaptive behaviors and physi-
- ologic responses. In addition to feedback, these modality-specific neurons also receive feedforward information regarding future anticipated homeostatic challenges. 5. The autonomic motor system contains neurons located in sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric ganglia located near the spinal column

the number of neurons activated and their degree of activation: Lower levels of activation induce mount ing, whereas higher levels induce aggression. Consistent with these results, genetic ablation of related progesterone receptor–expressing vlVMH neurons causes loss of both sexual behavior and aggression in males and loss of sexual behavior in females. Thus, it is clear that sex neurons in the vlVMH-expressing steroid receptors play a critical role in driving sexual behavior in males and females and aggression in males. Parental Behavior Is Controlled by the Preoptic Hypothalamic Area

## Nurturing parental behavior is key to the survival of one's offspring. Male rodents demonstrate strikingly different patterns of behavior. Males can be nurturing

or hostile to offspring, even to the point of infanticide, depending on whether they view the offspring as their own or those of another male. Female mice, on the other hand, are generally nurturing. Social interaction between mouse pups and appropriately receptive adult female and male mice, but not hostile adult male mice, induces activity in sub-

sets of galanin-expressing neurons in the POA. These offspring-activated neurons are largely distinct from POA neurons activated by mating. Genetic ablation of galanin-expressing POA neurons prevents nurturing parental behavior, even to the point of inducing uncharacteristic aggression in females toward their offspring. On the other hand, stimulation of these galanin-positive neurons in males, which are normally extremely hostile to unrelated pups, decreases aggression and induces nurturing pup grooming. Thus, neurons in the POA, in addition to controlling sexual behavior itself, also play a role in ensuring survival of the fruit of sexual behavior. Highlights

1. The hypothalamus and the autonomic and

neuroendocrine motor systems coordinate and

control body homeostasis by inducing adaptive

- behaviors; by controlling glands, smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and adipocytes; and by releasing hormones from the pituitary gland. 2. Homeostatic control of body temperature, fluid and electrolyte balance, and blood pressure allows organisms to function under harsh envi-
- ronmental conditions.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1041

- or embedded within peripheral targets. Functional subsets of autonomic neurons selectively innervate effector tissues comprised of smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, glandular epithelia, and adipocytes. 6. Sympathetic neurons are activated in response to exercise and stress. Parasympathetic and sympathetic neurons generally have antagonistic func-
- tions, but often act in concert. The enteric system coordinates peristaltic contractions of the gastrointestinal tract with mucosal function and local blood flow. 7. Preganglionic neurons that control the sympathetic and parasympathetic outflows are located in the spinal cord and brain stem.
8. Acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and neuropeptide cotransmitters act as synaptic signaling molecules in the autonomic motor system. Excitatory
- fast synaptic transmission in autonomic ganglia is mediated by acetylcholine acting on nicotinic receptors. G protein–coupled receptors in ganglia mediate additional pre- and postsynaptic excitatory and inhibitory effects. G protein–coupled receptors mediate transmitter actions at autonomic neuroeffector junctions. 9. The neuroendocrine system links the hypothalamus, via the pituitary gland, to various physiologic responses in the body. The posterior
- pituitary contains hypothalamic axon terminals that release two neurohormones into the blood: Vasopressin stimulates water reabsorption by the kidney, while oxytocin controls uterine contraction and milk release. The anterior pituitary contains endocrine cells that secrete hormones in response to factors released by hypothalamic neurons. These anterior pituitary hormones control the thyroid gland, glucocorticoid secretion

10/12/20 8:03 AM

3.


10.

Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

by the adrenal cortex, sex steroid secretion by the

gonads, lactation, and linear growth.

Body temperature is detected in multiple sites

- including the periphery, in and around major organs, and in the brain. Constancy of body
- temperature is maintained by multiple thermoreceptor-afferent/thermoeffector-efferent control loops. 11. Some neurons in the lamina terminalis are acti vated by both dehydration and loss of intravascular volume. Key parameters sensed in these

Motivational drives such as hunger have been

explained by two mechanisms: The deficiency

state (starvation) increases the reward value of

- food, or deficiency generates an aversive state, the resolution of which motivates behavior. 18. Sexually dimorphic regions in the hypothalamus control sexual behavior and aggression. Neural activity in the sexually dimorphic preoptic area
- -controls parental behavior. Full actualization of adult sex-specific behaviors also requires adult levels of gonadal steroids.
- deficiency states include osmolarity and angiotensin II levels, respectively. When these neurons are activated, they cause thirst and release of vasopressin from the posterior pituitary. Vasopressin release is also rapidly regulated in a feedforward fashion by cues that anticipate future disturbances in osmolarity. 12. Energy balance involves short-term and longterm feedback signals. Short-term signals from the gut mediate satiation, which terminates
- meals. CCK, released by intestinal endocrine cells, plays a key role in satiation. A key longterm signal is leptin, which is secreted by adipocytes in proportion to the amount of fat stores. When fat stores are low, the consequent low levels of leptin signal the brain to induce a hunger state and to decrease energy expenditure, resulting in replenished fat stores. 13. Leptin is more effective in defending against low fat stores than in resisting obesity. 14. POMC-, AgRP-, and MC4R-expressing neurons
- in the hypothalamus are key nodes in the afferent/ efferent loop controlling energy balance. Neurons
- that signal satiety are activated by satiety-promoting POMC neurons and inhibited by hunger-promoting AgRP neurons. 15. How specificity for a given goal (eg, food) is retained as neural information flows from the highly specific deficiency-regulated homeo-
- static neurons in the hypothalamus to the "nonspecific" reward and perception pathways in the accumbens and cortex is one of the great mysteries of motivated behaviors such as hunger and thirst. Solving this could provide clues for disorders of motivated behavior like drug addiction. 16. Leptin regulates hunger and energy expenditure in part by activating POMC neurons and inhibiting AgRP neurons. Hunger-promoting AgRP
- neurons are also rapidly regulated in a feedforward fashion by cues that anticipate future changes in energy balance.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1042

Bradford B. Lowell

Larry W. Swanson

John P. Horn

17.

Selected Reading

Andermann ML, Lowell BB. 2017. Towards a wiring diagram

understanding of appetite control. Neuron 95:757–778.

Berridge KC. 2004. Motivation concepts in behavioral neuro-

- science. Physiol Behav 81:179–209. Bourque CW. 2008. Central mechanisms of osmosensa-
- tion and systemic osmoregulation. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:519–531.
- Clarke IJ. 2015. Hypothalamus as an endocrine organ. Compr Physiol 5:217–253. Dulac C, O'Connell LA, Wu Z. 2014. Neural control of mater-
- nal and paternal behaviors. Science 345:765–770. Guyenet PG. 2006. The sympathetic control of blood pres-
- sure. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:335–346. Jænig, W. 2006. The Integrative Action of the Autonomic Nervous
- System. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univ. Press. Leib DE, Zimmerman CA, Knight ZA. 2016. Thirst. Curr Biol
- 26:R1260–R1265. Morrison SF. 2016. Central control of body temperature.
- F1000Res 5:F1000. Morton GJ, Meek TH, Schwartz MW. 2014. Neurobiology
- of food intake in health and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:367–378.
- Romanovsky AA. 2007. Thermoregulation: some concepts have changed. Functional architecture of the thermoregulatory system. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
- 292:R37–R46. Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL. 2014. 20 years of leptin: role of leptin in energy homeostasis in humans. J Endocrinol 223:T83–T96.
- Yang CF, Shah NM. 2014. Representing sex in the brain, one module at a time. Neuron 82:261–278.

10/12/20 8:03 AM

References

Ahima RS, Prabakaran D, Mantzoros C, et al. 1996. Role of

leptin in the neuroendocrine response to fasting. Nature

382:250–252.

- Aponte Y, Atasoy D, Sternson SM. 2011. AGRP neurons are sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior rapidly and without training. Nat Neurosci 14:351–355.
- Balthasar N, Dalgaard LT, Lee CE, et al. 2005. Divergence of melanocortin pathways in the control of food intake and energy expenditure. Cell 123:493–505.
- Berthoud HR, Neuhuber WL. 2000. Functional and chemical anatomy of the afferent vagal system. Auton Neurosci 85:1-17.
- Betley JN, Xu S, Cao ZF, et al. 2015. Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal. Nature 521:180–185.
- Brookes SJ, Spencer NJ, Costa M, Zagorodnyuk VP. 2013. Extrinsic primary afferent signalling in the gut. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 10:286–296.
- Burnstock G. 2013. Cotransmission in the autonomic nervous system. Handb Clin Neurol 117:23–35. Campos CA, Bowen AJ, Schwartz MW, Palmiter RD. 2016.
- Parabrachial CGRP neurons control meal termination. Cell Metab 23:811–820.
- Chambers AP, Sandoval DA, Seeley RJ. 2013. Integration of satiety signals by the central nervous system. Curr Biol 23:R379–R388.
- Chen Y, Lin YC, Kuo TW, Knight ZA. 2015. Sensory detection of food rapidly modulates arcuate feeding circuits. Cell 160:829–841.
- Coleman DL. 2010. A historical perspective on leptin. Nat Med 16:1097–1099. DeGroat WC, Booth AM, Yoshimura N. 1993. Neurophysiol-
- ogy of micturition and its modification in animal models of human disease. In: CA Maggi (ed). Nervous Control
- of the Urogenital System, pp. 227–348. Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers. Fenselau H, Campbell JN, Verstegen AM, et al. 2017. A rapidly acting glutamatergic ARC→PVH satiety circuit postsynaptically regulated by α-MSH. Nat Neurosci 20:
- 42–51. Furness JB. 2012. The enteric nervous system and neurogastroenterology. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 9: 286–294.
- Furness JB, Costa M. 1980. Types of nerves in the enteric nervous system. Neurosci 5:1–20. Furness JB, Jones C, Nurgali K, Clerc N. 2004. Intrinsic pri-
- mary afferent neurons and nerve circuits within the intestine. Prog Neurobiol 72:143–164.
- Garfield AS, Li C, Madara JC, et al. 2015. A neural basis for melanocortin-4 receptor-regulated appetite. Nat Neurosci 18:863–871.
- Gay VL. 1972. The hypothalamus: physiology and clinical use of releasing factors. Fertil Steril 23:50–63. Gibbins IL. 1995. Chemical neuroanatomy of sympathetic
- ganglia. In: E McLachlan (ed). Autonomic Ganglia, pp. 73–122. Luxembourg: Harwood Academic Publishers.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1043

Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival


Huszar D, Lynch CA, Fairchild-Huntress V, et al. 1997. Tar-

geted disruption of the melanocortin-4 receptor results in

obesity in mice. Cell 88:131–141.

- Ingalls AM, Dickie MM, Snell GD. 1950. Obese, a new mutation in the house mouse. J Hered 41:317–318. Krashes MJ, Koda S, Ye C, et al. 2011. Rapid, reversible acti-
- vation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice. J Clin Invest 121:1424–1428.
- Krashes MJ, Lowell BB, Garfield AS. 2016. Melanocortin-4 receptor-regulated energy homeostasis. Nat Neurosci 19:206–219.
- Lechner SG, Markworth S, Poole K, et al. 2011. The molecular and cellular identity of peripheral osmoreceptors. Neuron 69:332–344.
- Lee H, Kim DW, Remedios R, et al. 2014. Scalable control of mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. Nature 509:627–632.
- Lin D, Boyle MP, Dollar P, et al. 2011. Functional identification of an aggression locus in the mouse hypothalamus. Nature 470:221–226.
- Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, et al. 2015. Genetic studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology. Nature 518:197–206.
- Lowell BB, Spiegelman BM. 2000. Towards a molecular understanding of adaptive thermogenesis. Nature 404:652–660.
- Luquet S, Perez FA, Hnasko TS, Palmiter RD. 2005. NPY/ AgRP neurons are essential for feeding in adult mice but can be ablated in neonates. Science 310:683–685.
- Mandelblat-Cerf Y, Kim A, Burgess CR, et al. 2017. Bidirectional anticipation of future osmotic challenges by vasopressin neurons. Neuron 93:57–65.
- Mandelblat-Cerf Y, Ramesh RN, Burgess CR, et al. 2015. Arcuate hypothalamic AgRP and putative POMC neurons show opposite changes in spiking across multiple
- timescales. Elife 4:e07122. McKinley MJ, Yao ST, Uschakov A, McAllen RM, Rundgren M, Martelli D. 2015. The median preoptic nucleus: front and centre for the regulation of body fluid, sodium, tem-
- perature, sleep and cardiovascular homeostasis. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 214:8–32. Mountjoy KG, Robbins LS, Mortrud MT, Cone RD. 1992. The cloning of a family of genes that encode the melanocortin receptors. Science 257:1248–1251.
- Myers MG Jr, Leibel RL, Seeley RJ, Schwartz MW. 2010. Obesity and leptin resistance: distinguishing cause from effect. Trends Endocrinol Metab 21:643–651.
- Nakamura K, Morrison SF. 2011. Central efferent pathways for cold-defensive and febrile shivering. J Physiol 589:3641–3658.
- Oka Y, Ye M, Zuker CS. 2015. Thirst driving and suppressing signals encoded by distinct neural populations in the brain. Nature 520:349–352.
- Powley TL, Phillips RJ. 2004. Gastric satiation is volumetric, intestinal satiation is nutritive. Physiol Behav 82:69–74. Reichlin S. 1978. The hypothalamus: introduction. Res Publ
- Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis 56:1–14.

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Romanovsky AA. 2014. Skin temperature: its role in ther-

moregulation. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 210:498–507.

Rossi J, Balthasar N, Olson D, et al. 2011. Melanocortin-4

- receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons regulate energy balance and glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab
- 13:195–204. Saper CB. 2002. The central autonomic nervous system: conscious visceral perception and autonomic pattern generation. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:433–469.
- Saper CB, Romanovsky AA, Scammell TE. 2012. Neural circuitry engaged by prostaglandins during the sickness syndrome. Nat Neurosci 15:1088–1095.
- Shah BP, Vong L, Olson DP, et al. 2014. MC4R-expressing glutamatergic neurons in the paraventricular hypothalamus regulate feeding and are synaptically connected
- to the parabrachial nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:13193–13198. Song K, Wang H, Kamm GB, et al. 2016. The TRPM2 channel is a hypothalamic heat sensor that limits fever and can drive hypothermia. Science 353:1393–1398.
- Speakman JR, Levitsky DA, Allison DB, et al. 2011. Set points, settling points and some alternative models: theoretical options to understand how genes and environments
- combine to regulate body adiposity. Dis Model Mech 4:733–745. Stricker EM, Hoffmann ML. 2007. Presystemic signals in the control of thirst, salt appetite, and vasopressin secretion. Physiol Behav 91:404–412.
- Swanson LW. 2000. Cerebral hemisphere regulation of motivated behavior. Brain Res 886:113–164.

Kandel-Ch41\_1010-1044.indd 1044

Tan CH, McNaughton PA. 2016. The TRPM2 ion channel is

required for sensitivity to warmth. Nature 536:460–463.

Tan CL, Cooke EK, Leib DE, et al. 2016. Warm-sensitive neu-

- rons that control body temperature. Cell 167:47–59 e15. Tanaka M, Owens NC, Nagashima K, Kanosue K, McAllen
- RM. 2006. Reflex activation of rat fusimotor neurons by body surface cooling, and its dependence on the medul-
- lary raphe. J Physiol 572:569–583. Toates F 1986. Motivational Systems. New York: Cambridge University Press. Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BD, Lowell BB,
- Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.
- Wong LC, Wang L, D'Amour JA, et al. 2016. Effective modulation of male aggression through lateral septum to medial hypothalamus projection. Curr Biol 26:593–604.
- Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. 2014. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic area govern parental behaviour. Nature 509:325–330.
- Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, et al. 2013. Sexually dimorphic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus govern mating in both sexes and aggression in males. Cell
- 153:896–909. Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L, Friedman JM. 1994. Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human homologue. Nature 372:425–432.
- Zimmerman CA, Lin YC, Leib DE, et al. 2016. Thirst neurons anticipate the homeostatic consequences of eating and drinking. Nature 537:680–684.

10/12/20 8:03 AM


Emotion

The Modern Search for the Neural Circuitry of Emotion

Began in the Late 19th Century

The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Both Learned and

## Innate Fear The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in

## Innate Fear in Animals The Amygdala Is Important for Fear in Humans

The Amygdala's Role Extends to Positive Emotions

Emotional Responses Can Be Updated Through Extinction and Regulation

Emotion Can Influence Cognitive Processes

## Many Other Brain Areas Contribute to Emotional Processing

Functional Neuroimaging Is Contributing to Our Understanding of Emotion in Humans

Functional Imaging Has Identified Neural

## Correlates of Feelings Emotion Is Related to Homeostasis

Highlights

E

lation, compassion, sadness, fear, and anger

are commonly considered examples of emotions.

These states have an enormous impact on our

behavior and well-being. But what exactly is an emotion? Distinguishing different emotion states is difficult and requires an account of the environmentally or internally generated challenge an organism faces as well as its physiological responses. For example, before we can conclude that a rat is in a state of fear, we need to know that the rat is evaluating a specific threatening stimulus (a predator in its environment)

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1045

and is mounting an adaptive response, such as high

arousal and freezing.

Emotions are often represented along two dimen-

sions: valence (ie, pleasantness to unpleasantness) and intensity (ie, low to high arousal), called "core affect" in

many psychological theories. However, emotions can also be grouped into categories, such as categories of basic emotions (happiness, fear, anger, disgust, sadness) and categories of more complex emotions that help regulate social or moral behaviors (eg, shame, guilt, embarrassment, pride, jealousy). There is considerable debate about whether all the categories that are in common usage (like the ones just mentioned) will correspond to scientifically useful categories in a future neuroscience of emotion. Within experimental contexts, the term emotion is used in several different ways, often related to the ways in which emotion is measured (Box 42–1).

In everyday conversation, most people use the term "emotion" synonymously with "conscious experience of emotion" or "feeling," and most psychological studies in humans have focused on this sense of "emotion" as well. Most research in animals has focused instead on specific behavioral or physiological responses, in good part because it is impossible to obtain verbal reports in animal studies. Yet emotions have been conserved throughout the evolution of species, as Charles Darwin first observed in his seminal book, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. The empirical approach we describe in this chapter thus considers emotions as central brain states that can be studied in humans as well as many other animals, provided that we distinguish between emotions and feelings. Emotion states typically cause a broad range of physiological responses that occur when the brain

10/12/20 8:04 AM
Emotion

The Modern Search for the Neural Circuitry of Emotion

Began in the Late 19th Century

The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Both Learned and

## Innate Fear The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in

## Innate Fear in Animals The Amygdala Is Important for Fear in Humans

The Amygdala's Role Extends to Positive Emotions

Emotional Responses Can Be Updated Through Extinction and Regulation

Emotion Can Influence Cognitive Processes

## Many Other Brain Areas Contribute to Emotional Processing

Functional Neuroimaging Is Contributing to Our Understanding of Emotion in Humans

Functional Imaging Has Identified Neural

## Correlates of Feelings Emotion Is Related to Homeostasis

Highlights

E

lation, compassion, sadness, fear, and anger

are commonly considered examples of emotions.

These states have an enormous impact on our

behavior and well-being. But what exactly is an emotion? Distinguishing different emotion states is difficult and requires an account of the environmentally or internally generated challenge an organism faces as well as its physiological responses. For example, before we can conclude that a rat is in a state of fear, we need to know that the rat is evaluating a specific threatening stimulus (a predator in its environment)

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1045

and is mounting an adaptive response, such as high

arousal and freezing.

Emotions are often represented along two dimen-

sions: valence (ie, pleasantness to unpleasantness) and intensity (ie, low to high arousal), called "core affect" in

many psychological theories. However, emotions can also be grouped into categories, such as categories of basic emotions (happiness, fear, anger, disgust, sadness) and categories of more complex emotions that help regulate social or moral behaviors (eg, shame, guilt, embarrassment, pride, jealousy). There is considerable debate about whether all the categories that are in common usage (like the ones just mentioned) will correspond to scientifically useful categories in a future neuroscience of emotion. Within experimental contexts, the term emotion is used in several different ways, often related to the ways in which emotion is measured (Box 42–1).

In everyday conversation, most people use the term "emotion" synonymously with "conscious experience of emotion" or "feeling," and most psychological studies in humans have focused on this sense of "emotion" as well. Most research in animals has focused instead on specific behavioral or physiological responses, in good part because it is impossible to obtain verbal reports in animal studies. Yet emotions have been conserved throughout the evolution of species, as Charles Darwin first observed in his seminal book, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. The empirical approach we describe in this chapter thus considers emotions as central brain states that can be studied in humans as well as many other animals, provided that we distinguish between emotions and feelings. Emotion states typically cause a broad range of physiological responses that occur when the brain

10/12/20 8:04 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Box 42–1 Ways of Measuring Emotion

## Measures Commonly Used in Humans

Psychophysiology. Psychophysiology uses several meas-

ures to assay the physiological parameters associated

## with emotional states. These measures include auto

nomic responses (Chapter 41) as well as some somatic responses. The most commonly used measure is the galvanic skin response (also known as the skin conductance Table 42–1 Common Questionnaires Used to Assess Fear in Human Emotion Studies

Questionnaire

Fear Survey Schedule II

response), a measure of sympathetic autonomic arousal

derived from the sweatiness of the palms of the hands.

Other measures include heart rate, heart rate variabil-

-ity, blood pressure, respiration, pupil dilation, facial electromyography (EMG), and the startle response (see below). Some of these measures mostly correlate with basic dimensions of emotion, such as valence (eg, the

Type of fear questions

Probes an individual's level of fear across a range of different objects

| and situations that commonly evoke fear  Fear of Negative  Evaluation Scale  Measures fear of being evaluated negatively by others  Social Avoidance and  Distress Scale  Measures fear of social situations  Anxiety Sensitivity Index  Measures fear of experiencing different bodily sensations and feelings  Beck Anxiety Inventory  Measures fear and panic-related symptoms experienced over the prior week  Albany Panic and Phobia  Questionnaire  Has the subject estimate the amount of fear they would experience  in different situations  Fear Questionnaire  Measures the degree of avoidance due to fear  PANAS-X Fear (general)  Measures how much, in general, a person feels fear-related affective states  PANAS-X Fear (moment)  Measures how much, during the present moment, a person feels fear-related  affective states  PANAS, Positive and Negative Affect Schedule.   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

detects certain environmental situations. These physi-

ological responses are relatively automatic, yet depend

on context, and occur within the brain as well as

throughout the body. In the brain, they involve changes in arousal levels and in cognitive functions such as attention, memory processing, and decision making. Somatic responses involve endocrine, autonomic, and musculoskeletal systems (Chapter 41). In sum, emotions are neurobiological states that cause coordinated behavioral and cognitive responses triggered by the brain. This can occur when an individual detects a significant stimulus (positively or negatively charged) or has a specific thought or memory that leads to an endogenously generated emotion state. Some stimuli—objects, animals, or situations— trigger emotions without the organism having to learn

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1046

anything about those stimuli. Such stimuli have innately

reinforcing qualities and are called unconditioned

stimuli; examples are a painful shock or a disgusting

taste. However, the vast majority of stimuli acquire their emotional significance through associative learning. When an individual detects an emotionally significant stimulus, three physiological systems are engaged: the endocrine glands, the autonomic motor

system, and the musculoskeletal system (Figure 42–1). The endocrine system is responsible for the secretion and regulation of hormones into the bloodstream that affect bodily tissues and the brain. The autonomic system mediates changes in the various physiological control systems of the body: the cardiovascular system, the visceral organs, and the tissues in the body cavity (Chapter 41). The skeletal motor system mediates

10/12/20 8:04 AM

magnitude of the startle response) or arousal (eg, the

galvanic skin response), whereas others (eg, facial EMG)

can provide more fine-grained information about emo-

tions. Facial expression has been used extensively but has no simple relationship to specific emotions . Subjective ratings. Subjective ratings are often used in human studies and include categorical and continuous ratings (Table 42–1). These ratings can range along emo-

tion dimensions, such as valence (pleasantness/unpleasantness), or the intensity of specific emotions. Subjective ratings necessarily depend on culture-specific words and concepts for emotions. Experience sampling. Psychologists use experience sampling to quantify the emotions that people actually experience in everyday life. Participants might have their cell

phone sound an alarm every few hours, and they then have to stop whatever activity they are doing and fill out a brief questionnaire about what they are feeling at the moment. In this way, a plot of the data can characterize how people's emotions change throughout the day or over longer periods. It turns out that we are actually fairly good at predicting what emotion people will feel next, from knowing how they currently feel. Hormonal measures. Hormonal responses to emotional states are typically slower than psychophysiological measures. Emotion researchers measure a variety of

hormones to assay emotional states over these lengthy periods. Relatively undifferentiated arousal responses are used to evaluate stress. The stress hormone cortisol (Chapter 61) is easily measured from people's saliva. Specific experimental probes. Several specific behavioral and physiological assays are used to probe emotions with specific stimuli. These assays generally fall within

the field of psychophysiology. A common measure is the amplitude of a subject's eyeblink (or other startle overt behaviors such as freezing, fight-or-flight, and

particular facial expressions. Together, these three sys-

tems control the physiological expression of emotion Chapter 42 / Emotion reflexes) when a loud sound is presented. This is poten- tiated when the subject is in a negatively valenced emo- tional state. Potentiation of the startle reflex is often used to assay the level of anxiety in people, and the same measure has also been validated in animals. Measures Commonly Used in Nonhuman Animals Innate behavioral responses. Animals often exhibit ste-

## reotyped behaviors as a consequence of certain emotional states. Observing and scoring the behavior is

one method of measuring emotional behaviors. Such behaviors can include approaching a stimulus that is rewarding or that promises reward in the future (a positively valenced emotional state), as well as avoiding or defending against threatening stimuli (a negatively valenced emotional state). In addition, analysis of facial expressions can be utilized in many animal model systems, and has even been used for mice . Psychophysiology and specific experimental probes. As in the case of humans, animal studies can use several psychophysiological measures (eg, heart rate, respira-

tory rate, galvanic skin response, pupil diameter, startle). In addition, specific behavioral assays have been developed in animals, often derived from initial observations of their innate behavioral responses. Behaviors such as freezing, attacking, exploring, approaching, and hiding can be measured in response to wellcontrolled experimental stimuli that are designed to induce certain emotional states. The correspondence between human and animal behaviors, which Charles Darwin originally noted in his 1872 book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, provides powerful animal models for investigating human emotions and their pathology. positively valenced versus negatively valenced stimuli.

We briefly review how emotion states can be changed

through extinction and regulation and how emotion

states in the body. We begin this chapter with a discussion of the historical antecedents of modern research on the neu roscience of emotion. We then describe the neural cir

cuits and cellular mechanisms that underlie the most thoroughly studied emotion, fear, and in so doing, we will focus on the amygdala. However, it is important to note that there does not appear to be any single brain structure that participates in only one emotion. For instance, the amygdala, which has been known to participate in negatively valenced emotions, also plays a central role in positively valenced emotions: Distinct populations of neurons within the amygdala process

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1047

--interacts with other cognitive processes. We conclude with a survey on the relevance of emotion research to understanding psychiatric disorders. The Modern Search for the Neural Circuitry of

Emotion Began in the Late 19th Century

## The modern attempt to understand emotions began in 1890 when William James, the founder of American psy-

chology, asked: What is the nature of fear? Do we run

from the bear because we are afraid, or are we afraid because we run? James proposed that the conscious

10/12/20 8:04 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Sensory

systems Emotional responses Behavior

(freezing)

Autonomic

activity

(rise in blood

pressure)

Hormonal

release

(stress

hormones)

brain stem regions that control physiological responses, includ-

ing skeletomuscular action, autonomic nervous system activity,

and hormonal release. The figure shows some responses asso-

Emotion

systems Hypothalamus and brain stem Spinal cord and autonomic ganglia Somatic

<!-- image -->

tems converge on "emotion systems" (eg, the amygdala). If

feeling of fear is a consequence of the bodily changes the stimuli are emotionally salient, the emotion systems are activated, and their outputs are relayed to hypothalamic and

that occur during the act of running away—we feel

afraid because we run. James's peripheral feedback

theory drew on the knowledge of the brain at the time, namely, that the cortex had areas devoted to movement and sensation (Figure 42–2). Little was known at that time about specific areas of the brain responsible for emotion and feeling, but James's view is still debated to this day. At the turn of the 20th century, researchers found that animals were still capable of emotional responses after the complete removal of the cerebral hemi-

spheres, demonstrating that some aspects of emotion are mediated by subcortical regions. The fact that electrical stimulation of the hypothalamus could elicit autonomic responses similar to those that occur during emotional responses in an intact animal suggested to Walter B. Cannon that the hypothalamus might be a key region in the control of fight-or-flight responses and other emotions. In the 1920s, Cannon showed that transection of the brain above the level of the hypothalamus (by means of a cut that separates the cortex, thalamus, and

anterior hypothalamus from the posterior hypothalamus and lower brain areas) left an animal still capable of showing rage. By contrast, a transection below the hypothalamus, which left only the brain stem and

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1048

the spinal cord, eliminated the coordinated reactions ciated with fear. It omits many of the complexities of emotion (eg, the effects of emotion states on cognition).

of natural rage. This clearly implicated the hypothala-

mus in organizing emotional reactions. Cannon called

the hypothalamically mediated reactions "sham rage" because these animals lacked input from cortical areas, which he assumed were critical for the emotional experience of "real" rage (Figure 42–3). Cannon and his student Phillip Bard proposed an influential theory of emotion centered on the hypothalamus and thalamus. According to their theory,

sensory information processed in the thalamus is sent both to the hypothalamus and to the cerebral cortex. The projections to the hypothalamus were thought to produce emotional responses (through connections to the brain stem and spinal cord), while the projections to the cerebral cortex were thought to produce conscious feelings (Figure 42–2). This theory implied that the hypothalamus is responsible for the brain's evaluation of the emotional significance of external stimuli and that emotional reactions depend on this appraisal. In 1937, James Papez extended the Cannon-Bard theory. Like Cannon and Bard, Papez proposed that sensory information from the thalamus is sent to both the

hypothalamus and the cerebral cortex. The descending connections to the brain stem and spinal cord give rise to emotional responses, and the ascending connections to the cerebral cortex give rise to feelings. But Papez

10/12/20 8:04 AM

Effector cells Peripheral feedback theory Feeling Feeling William James's peripheral feedback theory. James proposed Central theory Papez circuit tex convey sensory information about the body responses. The cortical processing of this sensory feedback is the "feeling," according to James. The Cannon-Bard central theory. Walter Cannon and Philip Bard proposed that emotions are explained by processes within the central nervous system. In their model, sensory information went on to expand the neural circuitry of feelings con- siderably beyond the Cannon-Bard theory by interpos- ing a new set of structures between the hypothalamus and the cerebral cortex. He argued that signals from the hypothalamus go first to the anterior thalamus and then to the cingulate cortex, where signals from the hypothalamus and sensory cortex converge. This convergence accounts for the conscious experience of feeling in Papez's theory. The sensory cortex then projects to both the cingulate cortex and the hippocampus, which in turn makes connections with the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus, thus completing the loop (Figure 42–2). The hypothalamus is currently receiving intense interest in studies of emotion in animals, particularly in experiments using optogenetics to manipulate the activity of precise cell populations. These studies have shown that specific populations in the mouse ventromedial hypothalamus are necessary and sufficient for defensive emotion states. Thus the hypothalamus does not merely orchestrate emotional behaviors, but is part of the neural circuitry that constitutes the emotion state itself. The role of the hypothalamus in emotion is much less studied in humans, in part because functional Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1049

that information about emotionally competent stimuli is processed in sensory systems and transmitted to the motor cortex to produce responses in the body. Feedback signals to the cor-

<!-- image -->

Chapter 42 / Emotion

Feeling Cingulate cortex Anterior thalamus

evaluates the emotional qualities of the stimulus, and its

descending connections to the brain stem and spinal cord give rise to somatic responses, while the thalamocortical pathways give rise to conscious feelings. The Papez circuit. James Papez refined the Cannon-Bard theory by adding additional anatomical specificity. He proposed that the cingulate cortex is the cortical region that receives hypothalamic output in the creation of feelings. The outputs of the hypothalamus

reach the cingulate via the anterior thalamus, and the outputs of the cingulate reach the hypothalamus via the hippocampus. magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) does not have the

spatial resolution to investigate specific hypothalamic

nuclei, let alone neuronal subpopulations within them.

In the late 1930s, Heinrich Klüver and Paul Bucy removed the temporal lobes of monkeys bilaterally, thus lesioning all temporal cortex as well as subcortical

structures like the amygdala and hippocampus, and found a variety of psychological disturbances, including alterations in feeding habits (the monkeys put inedible objects in their mouth) and sexual behavior (they attempted to have sex with inappropriate partners, like members of other species). In addition, the monkeys had a striking lack of concern for previously feared objects (eg, humans and snakes). This remarkable set of findings came to be known as the Klüver-Bucy syndrome and already suggested that the amygdala might be important for emotion (although it was not the only structure lesioned in these experiments). Building on the Cannon-Bard and Papez models and the findings of Klüver and Bucy, Paul MacLean suggested in 1950 that emotion is the product of the

"visceral brain." According to MacLean, the visceral brain includes the various cortical areas that had long been referred to as the limbic lobe, so named by Paul

10/12/20 8:04 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

of the hippocampus as the part of the brain where

the external world (represented in sensory regions of

the lateral cortex) converged with the internal world

Coordinated

rage response

(represented in the medial cortex and hypothalamus), allowing internal signals to give emotional weight to external stimuli and thereby to conscious feelings. For MacLean, the hippocampus was involved both in the expression of emotional responses in the body and in the conscious experience of feelings. Subsequent findings raised problems for MacLean's limbic system theory. In 1957, it was found that damage to the hippocampus, the keystone of the Coordinated

limbic system, produced deficits in converting shortto long-term memory, a function that is distinct from emotions. In addition, animals with damage to the hippocampus are able to express emotions, and humans with hippocampal lesions appear to express and feel emotions normally. In general, damage to areas of the limbic system did not have the expected effects on emotional behavior. Several of MacLean's other ideas on emotion are nevertheless still relevant. MacLean thought that emotional responses are essential for survival and thererage response No coordinated rage response

rything above the transection (top) or transection at the level

of the anterior hypothalamus and the disconnection of everything above it (middle). Only isolated elements of rage can be elicited if the posterior hypothalamus also is disconnected (bottom). This work derives from historical lesion studies in animals. More recent work suggests a more complex picture, in which the hypothalamus is intimately involved in creating the emotion state itself, not merely its behavioral expression.

<!-- image -->

Broca because these areas form a rim (Latin limbus)

in the medial wall of the hemispheres. The visceral

brain was later renamed the limbic system. The limbic

system includes the various cortical areas that make up Broca's limbic lobe (especially medial areas of the temporal and frontal lobes) and the subcortical regions connected with these cortical areas, such as the amygdala and hypothalamus (Figure 42–4). MacLean intended his theory to be an elaboration of Papez's ideas. Indeed, many areas of MacLean's limbic system are parts of the Papez circuit. However,

MacLean did not share Papez's view that the cingulate cortex was the seat of feelings. Instead, he thought

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1050

fore involve relatively primitive circuits that have been conserved in evolution, an idea already proposed by Charles Darwin almost a century earlier. This notion is key to an evolutionary perspective of emotion. It is now clear that emotions are processed by many subcortical and cortical regions and that the limbic system is by no means the primary system for emotion. Nonetheless, one component of the original limbic system, the amygdala, has received the most attention in studies of both humans and animals. Today, the role of the amygdala in learned fear is probably the best workedout example of emotion processing in a specific brain structure, and therefore, we consider it next. The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Both

Learned and Innate Fear

## In Pavlovian fear conditioning, an association is learned between an unconditioned stimulus (US) (eg,

electric shock) and a conditioned stimulus (CS) (eg, a

tone) that predicts the US. For example, if an animal is presented with an emotionally neutral CS (a tone) for several seconds and then shocked during the final second of the CS, especially if this pairing of tone and shock is repeated several times, presentation of the tone alone will elicit defensive freezing and associated changes in autonomic and endocrine activity. In addition, many defensive reflexes, such as eyeblink and startle, will be facilitated by the tone alone.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

Figure 42–4 The limbic system consists

of the limbic lobe and deep-lying struc-

tures.  (Adapted, with permission, from

Nieuwenhuys et al. 1988.) A. This medial view of the brain shows the prefrontal limbic cortex and the limbic lobe. The limbic lobe consists of primitive cortical

- tissue (blue) that encircles the upper brain stem as well as underlying cortical structures (hippocampus and amygdala). B. Interconnections of the deep-lying structures included in the limbic system. The arrows indicate the predominant direction
- of neural activity in each tract, although these tracts are typically bidirectional.

Research in many laboratories has established that Fornix Chapter 42 / Emotion Cingulate gyrus Occipital lobe Medial dorsal nucleus of thalamus Dorsal longitudinal fasciculus Medial forebrain bundle in the lateral nucleus, have been elucidated in great

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

the amygdala is necessary for Pavlovian fear condi-

tioning: Animals with amygdala damage fail to learn

the association between the CS and the US and thus do not express fear when the CS is later presented alone. The amygdala consists of approximately 12 nuclei, but the lateral and central nuclei are especially important in fear conditioning (Figure 42–5). Damage to either

nucleus, but not to other regions, prevents fear conditioning. The lateral nucleus of the amygdala receives most sensory input (but the medial nucleus receives olfactory input), including sensory information about the CS (eg, a tone) from both the thalamus and the cortex. The cellular and molecular mechanisms within the amygdala that underlie learned fear, especially

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1051

detail. The findings support the view that the lateral

nucleus is a site of memory storage in fear condition-

ing. Neurons in the central nucleus, by contrast, mediate outputs to brain stem areas involved in the control of defensive behaviors and associated autonomic and humoral responses (Chapter 41). The lateral and central nuclei are connected by way of several local circuits within the amygdala, including connections with the basal and intercalated masses. The actual circuitry for Pavlovian learning is thus considerably more complex than what is indicated by Figure 42–5, involving multiple relays among amygdala regions. Sensory inputs reach the lateral nucleus from the thalamus both directly and indirectly. Much as

10/12/20 8:04 AM

A



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Auditory

cortex

<!-- image -->

(US) are relayed to the lateral nucleus of the amygdala from

the auditory and somatosensory regions of the thalamus and cerebral cortex. Convergence of the CS and US pathways in the lateral nucleus is believed to underlie the synaptic changes that mediate learning. The lateral nucleus communicates with the central nucleus both directly and through intra-amygdala predicted by the Cannon-Bard hypothesis, sensory sig-

nals from thalamic relay nuclei are conveyed to sen-

sory areas of cerebral cortex. As a result, the amygdala Freezing Autonomic nervous system Hormones that control various motor responses, including the central gray region (CG), which controls freezing behavior; the lateral hypothalamus (LH), which controls autonomic responses; and the paraventricular hypothalamus (PVH), which controls stress hormone secretion by the pituitary–adrenal axis. (Adapted from Medina et al. 2002.) The emotional charge of a stimulus is evaluated by the amygdala together with other brain structures, such as the prefrontal cortex. If this system detects

and cortex are activated simultaneously. However, the amygdala is able to respond to an auditory danger cue before the cortex can fully process the stimulus information. This scheme is well worked out only for auditory fear conditioning in rodents, and it remains unclear how it applies to other cases, such as visually evoked fear in humans. The lateral nucleus is thought to be a site of synaptic change during fear conditioning. The CS and US signals converge on neurons in the lateral nucleus;

when the CS and US are paired, the effectiveness of the CS in eliciting action potentials is enhanced. This basic mechanism for a form of associative learning is similar to cellular mechanisms that underlie declara tive memory in the hippocampus as well (Chapter 54). In particular, the synaptic plasticity found in the hippocampus has also been demonstrated in specific central amygdala circuits. The central amygdala thus does not simply drive motor outputs but is also part of the circuitry through which fear associations are formed and stored, very likely by transmitting information about the CS and US from the lateral nucleus. Neural plasticity likely also occurs in the basal and accessory basal nuclei during fear learning. As with the hypothalamus, recent work in rodents using tools such as optogenetics to manipulate specific subpopulations of amygdala neurons has begun to dissect this circuitry in further detail.

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1052

-danger, it orchestrates the expression of behavioral and physiological responses by way of connections from the central amygdala and parts of prefrontal cortex to the hypothalamus and brain stem. For example, freezing behavior is mediated by connections from the central nucleus to the ventral periaqueductal gray region. In addition, the basal and accessory basal nuclei of the amygdala send projections to many parts of the cerebral cortex, including the prefrontal, rhinal, and sensory cortices; these pathways provide a means for neural representations in the amygdala to influence cognitive functions. For example, through its widespread projections to cortical areas, the amygdala can modulate attention, perception, memory, and decision making. Its connections with the modulatory dopaminergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic, and cholinergic nuclei that project to cortical areas also influence cognitive processing (Chapter 40). Given these very widespread connections and functional effects, the amygdala is well situated to implement one of the key features of an emotion: its coordinated and multicom ponent responses. The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Innate Fear in Animals

-

## Although the majority of stimuli acquire their emotional significance through learning, especially in

10/12/20 8:04 AM

humans, many animals also rely on innate (uncondi-

tioned) signals in the detection of threats, mates, food,

and so forth. For example, rodents exhibit freezing and

other defensive behaviors when fox urine is detected. Recent studies have made considerable progress in uncovering the circuits underlying this innate fear. In mammals, sensory signals of unconditioned threats involving predator or conspecific odors are transmitted from the vomeronasal component of the olfac-

tory system (Chapter 29) to the medial amygdala. This stands in contrast to auditory and visual threats, which as noted above are processed via the lateral amygdala. Outputs of the medial amygdala reach the ventromedial hypothalamus, which connects with the premammillary hypothalamic nucleus. In contrast to learned fear, which depends on the ventral periaqueductal gray region, unconditioned fear responses depend on inputs from the hypothalamus to the dorsal periaqueductal gray region. There are other subcortical systems specialized for processing specific innate threats; for instance, the mouse superior colliculus is involved in detecting aerial predators, such as a hawk flying overhead. It is difficult to study unconditioned emotional responses in humans because the possibility of learning begins right at birth and cannot be experimentally con-

trolled, and because there appear to be large individual differences. For instance, it is thought that threat-related stimuli such as snakes and spiders may be innately fearinducing stimuli for those people with phobias toward these animals but not for people who keep them as pets. These large individual differences, and the relative roles of innate and learned fear, are important topics for understanding psychiatric illnesses such as anxiety disorders. The Amygdala Is Important for Fear in Humans

The basic findings from animal studies regarding the role

## of the amygdala in emotion have been confirmed in stud-

ies of humans. Patients with damage to the amygdala fail

to show fear conditioning when presented with a neutral CS paired with a US (electric shock or loud noise). In normal human subjects, activity in the amygdala increases during CS–US pairing, as measured with fMRI. Studies of rare human patients with bilateral amygdala lesions have led to the surprising finding of a dissociation in fear reactions to exteroceptive and

interoceptive stimuli (Figure 42–6). Not only do such patients fail to show any autonomic fear reactions to exteroceptive stimuli, to either the CS or the US, but they also appear to lack any conscious experience of fear, as evidenced either from behavioral observation or through subjective verbal report on a questionnaire. In one study, such a patient was confronted with snakes

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1053

Chapter 42 / Emotion


and spiders in an exotic pet store, with monsters in a

haunted house, and with autobiographical recollec-

tions of highly traumatic personal events (eg, being

threatened with death by another person). In none of these instances was there any evidence of fear, and the patient reported feeling no fear at all (even though the patient was able to feel other emotions). These findings argue that the amygdala is necessary for the induction and experience of fear in humans. By striking contrast, the very same patients with amygdala lesions report intense panic when they are made to feel as though they are suffocating (an intero-

ceptive fear cue, achieved by inhaling carbon dioxide, which lowers blood pH). The dissociation of fear reactions to exteroceptive and interoceptive stimuli supports the idea that there are multiple fear systems in the human brain and that the amygdala cannot be the only structure essential for all forms of fear. Ongoing work is providing more insight, such as mapping out the specific amygdala nuclei that are damaged in these patients and which nuclei are responsible for what types of deficits. This level of resolution is standard in animal studies of the amygdala but has been difficult to achieve in humans, since the amygdala lesions cannot be made experimentally but instead must rely on rare patients that reflect accidents of nature. Equally important, there are theoretical frameworks for how to subdivide the different types of fear. For example, fear can be mapped onto a dimension of threat imminence, which may cover a range from threats that are very far away (perhaps evoking mild anxiety, and engaging monitoring and attention), to threats that are more proximal (evoking fear, and engaging responses such as freezing), to threats that are about to cause death (evoking panic, and engaging defensive behaviors). Eventually, we will need to have a more finegrained mapping between brain systems and varieties of emotion that incorporates all of these details. Certain forms of fear learning are relatively unique to humans. For example, simply telling a human subject that the CS may be followed by a shock is enough to

allow the CS to elicit fear responses. The CS elicits characteristic autonomic responses even though it was never associated with the delivery of the shock. Humans can also be conditioned by allowing them to observe someone else being conditioned—the observer learns to fear the CS even though the CS or US was never directly presented to the observing subject. Some other animals also are able to learn fear through such observational learning, although this seems to be more rare than is the case in humans. One form of learning that is ubiquitous in humans appears to be unique to our species: active pedagogy, whereby another person teaches somebody that a stimulus is dangerous. While learning what to avoid

10/12/20 8:04 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A

Lesions of

the amygdala

<!-- image -->


*

Amygdala

lesion

Figure 42–6 In humans, the amygdala is necessary for fear

responses to external, but not internal, stimuli.

A. Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a subject's brain with PANAS-X Fear

(general)

<!-- image -->


(%)

bilateral amygdala lesions. Lesions were relatively restricted to the entire amygdala, a very rare lesion in humans.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

B. The subject with bilateral amygdala lesions, S.M., did not report feeling fear for any of the questionnaire-based measures normally used to assess fear and anxiety (percentage of maxi-

mum score possible [POMP]). This was consistent with other findings: She did not exhibit fear when watching horror movies, when confronted with large spiders and snakes, or when visiting a haunted house during Halloween. These findings show that the human amygdala is necessary for inducing fear in response to these external stimuli. (Abbreviation: PANAS , Positive and Negative Affect Schedule.) and what to approach in the world is a large part of development in the young of all species, active teaching

about the significance of stimuli has not been found in

any species other than humans so far (learning through passive observation is more common). The emotional learning and memory capacities of the human amygdala fall into the category of implicit

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1054

Amygdala

lesion

C. By contrast, a study of S.M. and two other subjects with

bilateral amygdala lesions found that they exhibited strong

panic when given an internal stimulus. They were asked to

inhale carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), which produces a feeling of suffocation. This caused all three patients with amygdala lesions and 3 out of 12 of the control subjects with intact amygdalae to experience panic attacks. D. Change from baseline in maximum heart rate during CO 2 inhalation relative to air trials. Both the amygdala lesion patients (n = 2) and the control subjects who panicked

(n = 3) had higher increases in heart rate than the control subjects who did not panic (n = 9). (Mean ± standard error of the mean.) (Adapted, with permission from Feinstein et al 2011, 2013.) learning and memory, which includes forms of memory

such as the unconscious recall of perceptual and motor

skills (Chapter 53). In situations of danger, however,

the hippocampus and other components of the medial temporal lobe system that participate in explicit learning and memory (the conscious recall of people, places, and things) will be recruited as well and will encode aspects

10/12/20 8:04 AM

-air)

B

Controls

Amygdala

lesion

30 40
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

A

Lesions of

the amygdala

<!-- image -->


*

Amygdala

lesion

Figure 42–6 In humans, the amygdala is necessary for fear

responses to external, but not internal, stimuli.

A. Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a subject's brain with PANAS-X Fear

(general)

<!-- image -->


(%)

bilateral amygdala lesions. Lesions were relatively restricted to the entire amygdala, a very rare lesion in humans.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

B. The subject with bilateral amygdala lesions, S.M., did not report feeling fear for any of the questionnaire-based measures normally used to assess fear and anxiety (percentage of maxi-

mum score possible [POMP]). This was consistent with other findings: She did not exhibit fear when watching horror movies, when confronted with large spiders and snakes, or when visiting a haunted house during Halloween. These findings show that the human amygdala is necessary for inducing fear in response to these external stimuli. (Abbreviation: PANAS , Positive and Negative Affect Schedule.) and what to approach in the world is a large part of development in the young of all species, active teaching

about the significance of stimuli has not been found in

any species other than humans so far (learning through passive observation is more common). The emotional learning and memory capacities of the human amygdala fall into the category of implicit

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1054

Amygdala

lesion

C. By contrast, a study of S.M. and two other subjects with

bilateral amygdala lesions found that they exhibited strong

panic when given an internal stimulus. They were asked to

inhale carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), which produces a feeling of suffocation. This caused all three patients with amygdala lesions and 3 out of 12 of the control subjects with intact amygdalae to experience panic attacks. D. Change from baseline in maximum heart rate during CO 2 inhalation relative to air trials. Both the amygdala lesion patients (n = 2) and the control subjects who panicked

(n = 3) had higher increases in heart rate than the control subjects who did not panic (n = 9). (Mean ± standard error of the mean.) (Adapted, with permission from Feinstein et al 2011, 2013.) learning and memory, which includes forms of memory

such as the unconscious recall of perceptual and motor

skills (Chapter 53). In situations of danger, however,

the hippocampus and other components of the medial temporal lobe system that participate in explicit learning and memory (the conscious recall of people, places, and things) will be recruited as well and will encode aspects

10/12/20 8:04 AM

-air)

B

Controls

Amygdala

lesion

30 40

of the learning episode. As a result, the learned indica-

tors of danger can also be recalled consciously, at least

in humans and probably in some other species as well.

Studies of patients with bilateral damage to the amygdala or hippocampus illustrate the separate contributions of these structures to implicit and explicit

memory for emotional events, respectively. Patients with damage to the amygdala show no conditioned skin-conductance responses to a CS (suggesting no implicit emotional learning) but have normal declarative memory of the conditioning experience (indicating intact explicit learning). By contrast, patients with hippocampal damage show normal conditioned skinconductance responses to the CS (suggesting intact implicit emotional learning) but have no conscious memory of the conditioning experience (indicating impaired explicit learning). Amygdala function is altered in a number of psychiatric disorders in humans, especially disorders of fear and anxiety (Chapter 61). In addition, Chapter 42 / Emotion


neurons involved in defense and in mating are also

close together and only modern molecular techniques

can test their independent roles.

Studies in nonhuman primates and rodents have investigated a suggestion first made by Larry Weiskrantz that the amygdala represents stimulus reward as well

as punishment. For example, in a recent study, monkeys were trained to associate abstract visual images with rewarding or aversive USs. The meaning was then reversed (eg, by pairing an aversive outcome with a visual image that had previously been associated with a reward). In this way, it was possible to distinguish the role of the amygdala in representing visual information from its role in representing the reinforcement (a rewarding or aversive stimulus) predicted by a visual image. Changes in the type of reinforcement associated with an image modulated neural activity in the amygdala, and the modulation occurred rapidly enough to account for behavioral learning. Subsequent studies using modern molecular and genetic techniques have demonstrated that distinct circuitry within the amygdala mediates a neural rep-

-resentation of rewarding USs, as well as rewarding experiences. The activation of a neural representation of an appetitive US in the amygdala is sufficient to induce innate valenced physiological responses as well as appetitive learning. Moreover, reactivation of neurons activated earlier by an enjoyable experience appears to be sufficient to elicit positive emotions. These findings are consistent with a growing number of functional imaging studies in humans that have shown that the amygdala is involved in emotions quite broadly. For example, the human amygdala is activated when subjects observe pictures of stimuli associated with food, sex, and money or when people make decisions based on the reward value of stimuli. Emotional Responses Can Be Updated Through

Extinction and Regulation

## Once conditioned fear has been learned, it can be extin -guished by later experiencing that the CS is now safe,

for instance, by repeatedly presenting the CS without

any US pairing. The circuitry underlying fear extinction has been studied in detail as it is highly relevant to psychiatric illnesses such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Projections from the prefrontal cortex to the amygdala are required to override the conditioned fear in the amygdala. While conditioned fear responses decline during extinction, they are never completely erased, as demonstrated by the phenomenon of reinstatement, where fear can suddenly reappear.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

the amygdala plays an important role in processing cues related to addictive drugs (Chapter 43). In all of these cases, the amygdala is but one component of a distributed neural network that includes other corti cal and subcortical regions. For instance, declarative memory for highly emotional events involves interactions between the amygdala and hippocampus; motivational consequences of Pavlovian conditioning involve interactions between the amygdala and the ventral striatum; and learning that a previously dangerous stimulus is now safe involves interactions between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex. An important future direction will be to go beyond examining each component in isolation in order to better understand how emotions are processed by complex multicomponent networks of brain regions. This level of analysis is common in studies of human emotion using fMRI (see below). The Amygdala's Role Extends to Positive Emotions

Although most work on the neural basis of emotion

## during the past half century has focused on aversive responses, especially fear, other studies have shown

that the amygdala is also involved in positive emotions, in particular the processing of rewards. In monkeys and rodents, the amygdala participates in associating neutral stimuli with rewards (appetitive Pavlovian conditioning), just as it participates in associating neutral stimuli with punishments, and there appear to be distinct populations of neurons that encode rewards and punishments in the amygdala. This is broadly similar to findings from the rodent hypothalamus, where

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1055


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Cognitive therapies for changing emotion states have

also been studied, primarily in humans. For instance, a

focused effort to increase or decrease the intensity of an

emotion like fear has some effect on the emotion state. Indeed, neuroimaging studies have found that people can, to some degree, change their amygdala activation to fear-inducing stimuli just by how they think about those stimuli. Emotion regulation is a complex phenomenon, since there are multiple strategies for changing the emotion, ranging from just suppressing the motor behaviors to better control over how we evaluate a situation. These multiple sources of emotion regulation, especially in humans, highlight the fact that emotions must often be adjusted in keeping with complex social norms. Emotion Can Influence Cognitive Processes amygdala lesions are impaired not only in their expe- rience and expression of fear, as described above, but also in their recognition of fear in other people. One such patient, a woman called S.M., was selectively impaired in recognizing fear from facial expressions. This impairment in turn appears to result from a more basic impairment in allocating visual attention to those regions of the face that normally signal fear. S.M. does not spontaneously fixate on the eye region of the face when she looks at facial expressions and therefore does not process detailed visual information from wide eyes that would normally contribute to the recognition of fear when one is looking at a fearful face (Figure 42–7). These findings suggest an important role for the amygdala in attention and highlight the possibility that apparently specific deficits for certain emotions (like

As evidenced in the above examples, emotion inter-

## acts with many other aspects of cognition, including

memory, decision making, and attention. We discussed

above an example of nondeclarative emotional memory, Pavlovian fear conditioning, but emotions can also influence declarative memory. Projections from the amygdala to the hippocampus can influence how learning is encoded and consolidated into long-term declarative memory. This accounts for why we remember best those events in our lives that are the most emo tional, such as weddings and funerals. Emotion has complex effects on decision making, as one might expect, since the subjective evaluation of such variables as risk, effort, and value is modulated by

emotion. For instance, different choices with the same objective risk can elicit different behavioral decisions depending on whether they are framed as a win or a loss. For example, subjects typically prefer a sure gain of $5 to a 50% chance of winning $10, but prefer a 50% chance of losing $10 to a sure loss of $5. Interestingly, fMRI studies have revealed that such framing modulates amygdala activation. There is greater amygdala activation in the "win" frame when subjects choose a sure amount over a risky gamble, and greater amygdala activation in the "loss" frame when subjects choose the gamble over the sure amount. Thus, value representations in the amygdala are not rigidly associated with stimuli but are modulated by context-dependent evaluation. Because emotionally relevant stimuli are highly salient to an organism's self-interest, they typically capture attention. For instance, people tend to orient

toward, and look at, emotionally relevant visual stimuli, even when those stimuli are presented under conditions where they cannot be consciously perceived. One intriguing finding is that patients with bilateral

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1056

-fear) might arise from more basic attentional or motivational effects. There is ongoing debate about the precise role of the human amygdala in attentional aspects of emotion processing: Some studies argue that it comes into play even for nonconscious threat-related stimuli and in a very automatic fashion; other studies argue that the amygdala requires more elaborated and conscious processing once attention has already been allocated. Single-neuron recordings from the human amygdala support the latter view, whereas some fMRI studies support the former view. All of the findings from human lesion studies will need to be more finely dissected; some recent work on patients who have damage only to specific amygdala subnuclei is yielding further insights. Many Other Brain Areas Contribute to

Emotional Processing

## As seen in the case of conditioned and unconditioned fear, the amygdala contributes to emotional processing

as part of a larger circuit, or set of circuits, that includes

regions of the hypothalamus and brain stem, eg, the periaqueductal gray region in the brain stem. Cortical areas are also important components of this circuit. A number of human studies have implicated the ventral region of the anterior cingulate cortex, the insular cortex, and the ventromedial prefrontal cor-

tex in various aspects of emotional processing. The medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala are closely connected with one another, and neurons in these brain regions show complex responses that encode information about many emotional and cognitive variables. These findings contribute to an emerging picture of a dynamic neural substrate for emotion states: Individual states are not the outcome of a single structure or specific neurons, but are more

10/12/20 8:04 AM


Controls Amygdala lesion

<!-- image -->

ment may be due to abnormal processing of information from

the face. (Reproduced, with permission, from Adolphs et al. 2005.) A. S.M. made significantly less use of information from the eye region of faces when judging emotion. These images show the regions of the face from which control subjects (left) or S.M.

(right) were able to recognize fear. The results were obtained by showing subjects many trials with only small parts of the face revealed. All those trials in which subjects were able to recognize fear could then be summed to produce an image like this, which shows the regions of the face that viewers make use of in order to discriminate fearful from happy faces (these particular parts of the face allow viewers to tell apart fearful from happy faces, whereas other parts do not help with this discrimination).

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1057

Chapter 42 / Emotion

Attending

to eyes

Amygdala lesion

B. While looking at whole faces, S.M. (right) exhibited abnormal

face gaze (indicated by white lines), making far fewer fixations

to the eyes than did controls (left). This shows that S.M. failed

to attend to and hence process visual information from the eye region. This deficit was observed across all emotions, but was most important for fear recognition because wide eyes normally predict fear. C. S.M. showed poor ability to recognize fear when freely observing whole faces (free viewing), but her performance improved remarkably when instructed to look at the eyes

(attending to eyes). This result shows that the role of the amygdala in processing fearful expressions involves directing attention onto features that are particularly significant (the eyes), rather than the downstream process of interpreting the sensory input.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

0.8



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

flexibly assembled over a distributed population of

multifunction neurons.

Some emotions are associated with social inter

-

action and range from empathy and pride to embarrassment and guilt. Like the primary emotions such as

fear, pleasure, or sadness, these social emotions produce various bodily changes and behaviors and can be experienced consciously as distinct feelings. This class of emotions may depend especially on cortical regions in the prefrontal cortex. Studies of patients with neurological disease and focal brain lesions have advanced the understanding of the neural circuitry of emotions (Box 42–2). For exam-

ple, damage to some sectors of the prefrontal cortex markedly impairs social emotions and related feelings. In addition, these patients show marked changes in social behavior that resemble the behavior of patients

Box 42–2 Lesion Studies of Emotion

## Examination of patients with focal lesions complements

neuroimaging studies of the neural correlates of emo-

tions. In addition to studies of the amygdala, lesion

studies have provided insights into the role of several other brain regions in processing emotions. One of the most famous set of studies harks back to the accident of Phineas Gage, who in 1848 suffered an injury to his ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Gage

was working on constructing a railway in Vermont and was tamping gunpowder into a hole with a long metal rod, called a tamping iron. By accident, he struck a spark in the rock and the gunpowder exploded, shooting the tamping iron straight through his head. Amazingly, Gage lived for many years after this horrible accident, but he was a changed person with notable changes in his social and emotional behavior.

This was the first evidence that parts of the prefrontal cortex played a role in emotions. Since Gage, several patients with damage centered on the ventromedial prefrontal cortex have been described. These patients have poor insight and decision-making abilities and tend to have blunted or unusual emotional responses, especially for social emotions. Unlike normal individuals, patients with these frontal lesions do not exhibit changes in heart rate or degree of palm sweating when shown pictures that have emo-

tional content, although they can describe the pictures flawlessly. Likewise, patients with frontal lesions do not show skin conductance changes, a sign of sympathetic activation, during the period that precedes making risky

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1058

with developmental sociopathic personalities. Patients

with damage to some sectors of the prefrontal cortex

are unable to hold jobs, cannot maintain stable social

-

relationships, are prone to violate social conventions, and cannot maintain financial independence. It is common for family ties and friendships to break after the onset of this condition. Recent studies reveal that, under controlled experimental conditions, the moral judgments of these patients can also be flawed. Patients with medial and ventral frontal lobe dam age, unlike patients with more dorsal or lateral frontal lobe damage, do not have motor defects such as

limb paralysis or speech defects and thus may appear at first to be neurologically normal. Their perceptual abilities, attention, learning, recall, language, and motor abilities often show no signs of disturbance. Some patients have IQ scores in the superior range.

and disadvantageous decisions, suggesting that their

emotional memory is not engaged during that critical

period. Also unlike normal subjects, these patients fail

in tasks in which they have to make a decision under conditions of uncertainty, and in which reward and punishment are important factors. Several brain regions are also more specifically involved in feelings. Damage to the right somatosensory cortex (primary and secondary somatosensory cortices

and insula) impairs social feelings such as empathy. Consistent with this finding, patients with lesions in the right somatosensory cortex fail to guess accurately the feelings behind the facial expressions of other individuals. This ability to read faces is not impaired in patients with comparable lesions of the left somatosensory cortex, indicating that the right cerebral hemisphere is dominant in the processing of at least some feelings. Body sensations such as pain and itch remain intact, as do feelings of basic emotions such as fear, joy, and sadness. On the other hand, damage to the human insular cortex, especially on the left, can suspend addictive behaviors, such as smoking. This suggests that the insu-

lar cortices play a role in associating external cues with internal states such as pleasure and desire. Interestingly, complete bilateral damage to the human insular cortices, as caused by herpes simplex encephalitis, does not eliminate emotional feelings or body sensations, suggesting that the somatosensory cortices and subcortical nuclei in the hypothalamus and brain stem are also involved in generating feeling states.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

For these reasons, they sometimes attempt to return to

their work and social activities after their initial recov

-

ery from brain damage. Only when they start to inter-

act with others are their defects noticed. In the prefrontal cortex, the ventromedial sector is particularly important for such interactions. In most patients with impaired social emotions, this sector is

damaged bilaterally, although damage restricted to the right side can be sufficient to cause impairments. The critical region encompasses Brodmann's areas 12, 11, 10, 25, and 32, which receive extensive projections from the dorsolateral and dorsomedial sectors of the prefrontal cortex. Some of these areas project extensively to subcortical areas related to emotions: the amygdala, the hypothalamus, and the periaqueductal gray region in the brain stem. Interestingly, when asked about punishment, reward, or responsibility, adult patients with damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex often respond

as if they still have the basic knowledge of the rules, but their actions indicate that they fail to use them in real-life situations. This dissociation suggests that their behavioral defects are not caused by a loss of factual knowledge but rather by impairment of the brain's assignment of motivational value to factors that normally exert control over behavior. In some respects, this dissociation is similar to the dissociation between explicit and implicit emotional learning visà-vis the hippocampus and the amygdala. An interesting hypothesis arising from these dissociations is that one might find greater deficits following lesions to emotion-related structures, like the amygdala or ventromedial prefrontal cortex, in other species, or in children, in whom explicit behavioral control has not yet evolved or developed to the degree that it has in adults. There is some support for this idea: Lesions to these structures early in life can result in more severe deficits in emotional and social behaviors than if the lesions are sustained in adulthood (a pattern opposite to that of most other lesions, which show better recov ery of function the earlier the onset). These findings also suggest hypotheses for neural dysfunction that may contribute to the emotional difficulties seen in developmental psychiatric disorders, such as autism. The above lesion studies have been complemented by controlled experimental studies using fMRI, which provide further insight into mechanisms. Functional Chapter 42 / Emotion


punishments and rewards is computed as part of the

mechanism that guides this kind of decision making.

Punishment and reward are frequently featured in

experiments involving economic and moral decisions, and such decision making prominently involves many of the same structures that are also involved in processing emotions. The prefrontal cortex, especially areas in the ventromedial sector, operates in parallel with the amygdala. During an emotional response, ventromedial

areas govern the attention accorded to certain stimuli, influence the content retrieved from memory, and help shape mental plans for responding to the triggering stimulus. By influencing attention, both the amygdala and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex are also likely to alter cognitive processes, for example, by speeding up or slowing down the flow of sensory representations (Chapter 17). Functional Neuroimaging Is Contributing to

Our Understanding of Emotion in Humans

## Neuroimaging studies of emotions typically use fMRI. These studies have contributed to our understanding

of emotion in three important ways. First, they have

begun to dissociate and experimentally manipulate specific aspects of emotion, such as feelings, value, or concepts of emotions. These studies are beginning to show how all these different aspects can be coordinated by activity in different brain regions. Second, fMRI studies on emotion have been accumulating at an ever-increasing pace, and much of the data from such studies are now widely available. This

-provides the opportunity for meta-analyses of many studies, avoiding the limitations that may be inherent in any one study in isolation. For instance, some metaanalyses have confirmed the role of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in representing value for many different kinds of stimuli, including food and money. Other meta-analyses have suggested that specific basic emotions (eg, fear, anger, or happiness) activate a widely distributed and overlapping set of brain regions, confirming the view that no brain structure is responsible for a single emotion. Finally, fMRI studies have begun to use novel methods in their analyses. For example, the pattern of activation seen across many voxels in a brain region,

rather than the mean level of activation in that region, is used to train powerful machine-learning algorithms to classify emotion states. This approach is demonstrating that it is possible to decode specific emotion states from distributed patterns of brain activation.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

imaging of value-based decision making in healthy human subjects shows that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex is activated during the period before making a choice. That same region is activated also just by the administration of punishment and reward, supporting the notion that the emotional significance of anticipated

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1059


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Functional Imaging Has Identified Neural

Correlates of Feelings

## Conscious experiences of an emotion are generally referred to as feelings. Evidence for the neural correlates of feelings comes primarily from functional imag-

ing studies of humans and from neuropsychological testing of patients with specific brain lesions. A main challenge for these studies is in dissociating the conscious experience of the emotion from other aspects of the emotion, such as the elicitation of physiological responses, since these tend to occur contemporaneously. Another challenge is how to connect such studies with studies of emotion in animals, where we have no agreed-upon dependent measures to assay what they consciously experience. One early functional imaging study used positron emission tomography to test the idea that feelings are correlated with activity in those cortical and subcortical

somatosensory regions that specifically receive inputs related to the internal environment—the viscera, endocrine glands, and musculoskeletal system. Healthy subjects were asked to recall personal episodes and to attempt to reexperience as closely as possible the emotions that accompanied those events. Activity changed in many regions known to represent and regulate body states, such as the insular cortex, secondary somatosensory cortex (S-II), cingulate cortex, hypothalamus, and upper brain stem. These results support the idea that at least a part of the neural substrate for feelings involves brain regions that regulate and represent bodily states, a finding that bears some resemblance to the hypothesis of William James mentioned earlier, that feelings are based on an awareness of bodily reactions. The importance of both cortical and subcortical structures in processing feelings is also borne out by more recent fMRI studies. One such study examined

the feeling of fear induced by anticipation of electrical shock (Figure 42–8). In this study, subjects lay in the scanner while they saw a game on a video screen in which a virtual predator (a red dot) gets closer to the subject. Once the predator caught them, they could receive a painful electric shock to the hand. The anxiety produced when the predator was some distance away was associated with activation of the medial prefrontal cortex; as the predator closed in, the periaqueductal gray became activated, and this was correlated with reports by the subjects of a feeling of dread. This finding supports a role for the medial prefrontal cortex in planning and anticipation related to a distant threat and a role for the periaqueductal gray in mounting the defensive responses required for coping with an immediate threat.

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1060

Another brain region of interest in relation to feel-

ings is the subgenual sector of the anterior cingulate

cortex (Brodmann's area 25), which has been found in

neuroimaging studies to be activated when subjects are experiencing sadness. This region is of special interest because it is also differentially activated in patients with bipolar depression, and it appears thinned in structural MRI scans of patients with chronic depression. Direct electrical stimulation of this brain region (deep brain stimulation) can dramatically improve the mood of some patients with severe depression. Emotion Is Related to Homeostasis

While it seems clear that no brain region is special-

## ized for any specific emotion, it is even doubtful that

there are any brain regions specialized for emotions

in general. It may be that all brain regions involved in emotions also carry out other functions. In fact, those nonemotional functions may give us clues about how emotions evolved and, indeed, may be the basic building blocks through which emotion states are assembled. For example, sectors of the human insular cortex that are activated during recall of feelings are also activated during the conscious sensation of pain and

temperature. The insular cortex receives homeostatic information (about temperature and pain, changes in blood pH, carbon dioxide, and oxygen) through pathways that originate in peripheral nerve fibers. These afferent fibers include, for example, the C and Aδ fibers that form synapses with neurons in lamina I of the posterior horn of the spinal cord or the pars caudalis of the trigeminal nerve nucleus in the brain stem. The pathways from lamina I and the trigeminal nucleus project to brain stem nuclei (nucleus of the solitary tract and parabrachial nucleus) and from there to the thalamus and on to the insular cortex. The identification of this functional system is further support for the idea that signals in the afferent somatosensory pathways play a role in the processing of feelings. Moreover, in patients with pure autonomic failure, a disease in which visceral afferent information is severely compromised, functional imaging studies

reveal a blunting of emotional processes and attenuation of activity in the somatosensory areas that contribute to feelings. Like other feelings, social feelings engage the insular cortices and the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices (S-I and S-II), as has been found in functional neuroimaging experiments evaluating empathy for pain and, separately, admiration and compassion.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

A

Distant threat

<!-- image -->

Figure 42–8 Both cortical and subcortical regions come

into play during emotion states. Results are from a functional

magnetic resonance imaging study in which a subject lies in B. When the predator gets closer to the subject, activity in the prefrontal cortex and periaqueductal gray matter increases.

Notably, this pattern of neural activation shifts such that a

, distant predator elicits greater activity in the medial prefrontal cortex, whereas a predator close by elicits more activity in the periaqueductal gray. C. Activation of the periaqueductal gray (PAG) is correlated with the subjective sense of dread measured by ratings that subjects gave while in the scanner.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

the scanner while watching a virtual predator (red dot) move around on the screen and get closer to a subject (blue triangle representing the actual research participant). (Reproduced, with permission, from Mobbs et al. 2007. Copyright © 2007 AAAS.) A. Once the predator catches up to the subject, there is a chance that a real and painful electric shock will be delivered to the hand.

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1061

Chapter 42 / Emotion



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Using these data as support, some influential

modern theories build on William James's original

hypothesis and propose that the feeling of all emotions

is grounded in the brain's representation of bodily homeostasis. As in the case of the amygdala's role in both positive and negative emotions, the insula's role in processing both interoceptive and emotional information is still compatible with the possibility that these processes are distinct. That is, different populations of neurons within these structures may be involved in processing different emotions. Therefore, fMRI may not provide the level of resolution needed to elucidate distinct yet anatomically intermingled neuronal populations, and cellular techniques in animal models may be required. Although most neuroscience research thus far has focused on negatively valenced emotions, the neural circuitry for positively valenced emotions is being elu-

cidated in studies in both humans and animals. These studies consistently implicate the medial prefrontal cortex in computing the subjective value of rewards, as well as the nucleus accumbens and other nuclei of the basal ganglia in processing the hedonic component (or pleasure) of positive emotions. A growing number of functional imaging studies in humans—especially in the fields of neuroeconomics and social neuroscience— links the role of these structures in emotion processing to their role in value-based decision making and social behavior. Highlights

1. In the overall physiology of regulating the body

and behavior of organisms, emotion states carry

out functions intermediate to those of the simpler

- processes of reflexes and homeostatic regulation, on the one hand, and those of cognitive processes and deliberate behavior on the other. Emotions are more flexible, context-dependent, and controlled than are simple reflexes, but less flexible, context-dependent, and controlled than deliberate behavior. Emotions evolved to produce behavior in response to recurring environmental and internal challenges that are too varied for reflexes, but sufficiently stereotyped that they do not require the full flexibility of cognition. 2. Emotion states need to be carefully distinguished from the conscious experience of emotion (feelings) and also from the concepts and words that
- we have in everyday language to describe emotions. For example, a hissing cat's behavior is caused by an emotion state, but whether the cat

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1062

consciously feels afraid is unclear. The cat prob-

ably has no concept, and certainly no words, with

which to think about the emotion. Human sub

-

- jects who recognize fear while observing a facial expression are attributing fear to another person and are thinking about a particular emotion, but are not themselves necessarily in a state of fear or experiencing fear. It is a major challenge in designing experiments, especially in humans, to independently control and manipulate these different components of emotion. 3. Emotions coordinate integrated changes in many organismal parameters, including effects on somatic behavior, autonomic and endocrine
- responses, and cognition. We do not yet understand how this coordination arises, although it is probably achieved through a combination of hierarchical control (through brain regions that function as "command centers" of sorts) and distributed dynamics. Understanding how this is accomplished in biological organisms will also inform how we might engineer robots that exhibit emotional behaviors in the future. 4. Different specific emotions can be thought of categorically (eg, happiness, fear, anger) or dimensionally (in terms of arousal and valence or other
- dimensional frameworks). It is likely that many of the categories for which we have words in a particular language (like the examples just given) will need to be revised once we have a more scientific understanding. New analytic methods applied to data acquired using fMRI, including methods that take into account the spatial and temporal patterns of brain activity and utilize powerful machine-learning algorithms, may provide new insights into how the brain mediates a broad range of emotions. 5. In humans, emotions can be regulated by several mechanisms. Thus, we have some control over how we feel and some control over how we
- express emotional behaviors, for instance, through facial expressions. Nonhuman animals do not have this same level of control, and so their emo -tional behaviors will generally be honest signals of their emotion state, whereas humans often engage in strategic deception. 6. Fear is probably the emotion whose neurobiology is best understood. It depends on the amygdala, in both animals and humans. However, some data
- suggest that certain types of fear, such as the panic of suffocating induced by inhaling carbon dioxide, are independent of the amygdala. Indeed, we now know that the amygdala is part of a distributed

10/12/20 8:04 AM

brain system, and therefore, many other brain

regions also participate in processing fear. Increas-

ingly, modern studies use sophisticated genetic and

- cellular techniques to image and to causally manipulate brain function, allowing us to understand the necessary and sufficient roles of multiple brain structures in mediating different emotional behaviors. 7. The ventral and medial prefrontal cortex is intimately involved in emotion and connected with the amygdala. Social emotions, reward represen-
- tations, and emotion regulation and extinction all involve specific sectors of prefrontal cortex. This region of the brain, together with the insula, may also be the most important for our conscious experience of emotions, an aspect of emotion that remains the most challenging to study.

Chapter 42 / Emotion


McGaugh JL. 2003. Memory and Emotions: The Making of Lasting

Memories. New York: Columbia Univ Press.

Salzman CD, Fusi S. 2010. Emotion, cognition, and mental

- state representation in amygdala and prefrontal cortex. Ann Rev Neurosci 33:173–202.
- Thornton MA, Tamir DI. 2017. Mental models accurately predict emotion transitions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:5982–5987.
- Whalen PJ, Phelps EA. 2009. The Human Amygdala. New York: Guilford Press.
- References

Adolphs R, Gosselin F, Buchanan T, Tranel D, Schyns P,

Damasio A. 2005. A mechanism for impaired fear recogni-

tion in amygdala damage. Nature 433:68–72.

- Anderson SW, Bechara A, Damasio H, Tranel D, Damasio AR. 1999. Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci
- C. Daniel Salzman 2:1032–1037. Berridge KC, Kringelbach ML. 2013. Neuroscience of affect: brain mechanisms of pleasure and displeasure. Curr Opin Neurobiol 23:294–303.

Ralph Adolphs

- Cahill L, McGaugh JL. 1998. Mechanisms of emotional arousal and lasting declarative memory. Trends Neurosci 21:294–299.
- Clithero JA, Rangel A. 2014. Informatic parcellation of the network involved in the computation of subjective value. Soc Cogn and Affect Neurosci 9:1289–1302.
- Damasio AR, Grabowski TJ, Bechara A, et al. 2000. Feeling emotions: subcortical and cortical brain activity during the experience of self-generated emotions. Nat Neurosci
- 3:1049–1056. Damasio H, Grabowski T, Frank R, Galaburda AM, Damasio AR. 1994. The return of Phineas Gage: clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient. Science 264:1102–1105.
- De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Dolan RJ. 2006. Frames, biases, and rational decision-making in the human brain. Science 313:684-687.
- Gore F, Schwartz EC, Brangers BC, et al. 2015. Neural representations of unconditioned stimuli in basolateral amygdala mediate innate and learned responses. Cell 162:132–145.
- Holland PC, Gallagher M. 2004. Amygdala-frontal interactions and reward expectancy. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:148–155.
- Jin J, Gottfried JA, Mohanty A. 2015. Human amygdala represents the complete spectrum of subjective valence. J Neurosci 35:15145–15156.
- LeDoux, JE. 1996. The Emotional Brain. 1996. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. LeDoux JE. 2000. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev
- Neurosci 23:155–184. Lin D, Boyle MP, Dollar P, Lee H, Perona P, Anderson DJ.
2011. Functional identification of an aggression locus in the mouse hypothalamus. Nature 470:221–226.
- MacLean PD. 1990. The Triune Brain in Evolution. New York: Plenum.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

Selected Reading

Amaral DG and Adolphs R (eds). 2016. Living Without an

Amygdala. New York: Guilford Press.

Anderson, DJ, Adolphs R. 2018. The Neuroscience of

- Emotion in People and Animals: A New Synthesis. Princeton University Press.
- Bechara A, Tranel D, Damasio H, Adolphs R, Rockland C, Damasio AR. 1995. A double dissociation of conditioning and declarative knowledge relative to the amygdala and
- hippocampus in humans. Science 269:1115–1118. Craig AD. 2002. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:655–666.
- Damasio AR. 1994. Descartes's Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Penguin Books. Darwin, C. 1872/1965. The Expression of the Emotions in Man
- and Animals. Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press. Dolan RJ. 2002. Emotion, cognition, and behavior. Science
- 298:1191–1194. Feinstein JS, Adolphs R, Damasio A, Tranel D. 2011. The
- human amygdala and the induction and experience of fear. Curr Biol 21:34–38.
- Feinstein JS, Buzza C, Hurlemann R, et al. 2013. Fear and panic in humans with bilateral amygdala damage. Nat Neurosci 16:270–272.
- Feldman Barrett L, Adolphs R, Marsella S, Martinez AM, Pollack SD. 2019. Emotional expressions reconsidered: challenges to inferring emotion from human facial move-
- ments. Psychol Sci Public Interest 20:1–68.

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1063
brain system, and therefore, many other brain

regions also participate in processing fear. Increas-

ingly, modern studies use sophisticated genetic and

- cellular techniques to image and to causally manipulate brain function, allowing us to understand the necessary and sufficient roles of multiple brain structures in mediating different emotional behaviors. 7. The ventral and medial prefrontal cortex is intimately involved in emotion and connected with the amygdala. Social emotions, reward represen-
- tations, and emotion regulation and extinction all involve specific sectors of prefrontal cortex. This region of the brain, together with the insula, may also be the most important for our conscious experience of emotions, an aspect of emotion that remains the most challenging to study.

Chapter 42 / Emotion


McGaugh JL. 2003. Memory and Emotions: The Making of Lasting

Memories. New York: Columbia Univ Press.

Salzman CD, Fusi S. 2010. Emotion, cognition, and mental

- state representation in amygdala and prefrontal cortex. Ann Rev Neurosci 33:173–202.
- Thornton MA, Tamir DI. 2017. Mental models accurately predict emotion transitions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:5982–5987.
- Whalen PJ, Phelps EA. 2009. The Human Amygdala. New York: Guilford Press.
- References

Adolphs R, Gosselin F, Buchanan T, Tranel D, Schyns P,

Damasio A. 2005. A mechanism for impaired fear recogni-

tion in amygdala damage. Nature 433:68–72.

- Anderson SW, Bechara A, Damasio H, Tranel D, Damasio AR. 1999. Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci
- C. Daniel Salzman 2:1032–1037. Berridge KC, Kringelbach ML. 2013. Neuroscience of affect: brain mechanisms of pleasure and displeasure. Curr Opin Neurobiol 23:294–303.

Ralph Adolphs

- Cahill L, McGaugh JL. 1998. Mechanisms of emotional arousal and lasting declarative memory. Trends Neurosci 21:294–299.
- Clithero JA, Rangel A. 2014. Informatic parcellation of the network involved in the computation of subjective value. Soc Cogn and Affect Neurosci 9:1289–1302.
- Damasio AR, Grabowski TJ, Bechara A, et al. 2000. Feeling emotions: subcortical and cortical brain activity during the experience of self-generated emotions. Nat Neurosci
- 3:1049–1056. Damasio H, Grabowski T, Frank R, Galaburda AM, Damasio AR. 1994. The return of Phineas Gage: clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient. Science 264:1102–1105.
- De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Dolan RJ. 2006. Frames, biases, and rational decision-making in the human brain. Science 313:684-687.
- Gore F, Schwartz EC, Brangers BC, et al. 2015. Neural representations of unconditioned stimuli in basolateral amygdala mediate innate and learned responses. Cell 162:132–145.
- Holland PC, Gallagher M. 2004. Amygdala-frontal interactions and reward expectancy. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:148–155.
- Jin J, Gottfried JA, Mohanty A. 2015. Human amygdala represents the complete spectrum of subjective valence. J Neurosci 35:15145–15156.
- LeDoux, JE. 1996. The Emotional Brain. 1996. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. LeDoux JE. 2000. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev
- Neurosci 23:155–184. Lin D, Boyle MP, Dollar P, Lee H, Perona P, Anderson DJ.
2011. Functional identification of an aggression locus in the mouse hypothalamus. Nature 470:221–226.
- MacLean PD. 1990. The Triune Brain in Evolution. New York: Plenum.

10/12/20 8:04 AM

Selected Reading

Amaral DG and Adolphs R (eds). 2016. Living Without an

Amygdala. New York: Guilford Press.

Anderson, DJ, Adolphs R. 2018. The Neuroscience of

- Emotion in People and Animals: A New Synthesis. Princeton University Press.
- Bechara A, Tranel D, Damasio H, Adolphs R, Rockland C, Damasio AR. 1995. A double dissociation of conditioning and declarative knowledge relative to the amygdala and
- hippocampus in humans. Science 269:1115–1118. Craig AD. 2002. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:655–666.
- Damasio AR. 1994. Descartes's Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Penguin Books. Darwin, C. 1872/1965. The Expression of the Emotions in Man
- and Animals. Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press. Dolan RJ. 2002. Emotion, cognition, and behavior. Science
- 298:1191–1194. Feinstein JS, Adolphs R, Damasio A, Tranel D. 2011. The
- human amygdala and the induction and experience of fear. Curr Biol 21:34–38.
- Feinstein JS, Buzza C, Hurlemann R, et al. 2013. Fear and panic in humans with bilateral amygdala damage. Nat Neurosci 16:270–272.
- Feldman Barrett L, Adolphs R, Marsella S, Martinez AM, Pollack SD. 2019. Emotional expressions reconsidered: challenges to inferring emotion from human facial move-
- ments. Psychol Sci Public Interest 20:1–68.

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1063


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, et al. 2005. Deep brain

stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron

45:651–660.

- Medina JF, Repa CJ, Mauk MD, LeDoux JE. 2002. Parallels between cerebellum- and amygdala-dependent conditioning. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:122–131.
- Mobbs D, Petrovic P, Marchant JL, et al. 2007. When fear is near: threat imminence elicits prefrontal-periaqueductal gray shifts in humans. Science 317:1079–1083.
- Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen Chr. 1988. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
- Ochsner KN, Gross JJ. 2005. The cognitive control of emotions. Trends Cogn Sci 9:242–249. Paton JJ, Belova MA, Morrison SE, Salzman CD. 2006. The pri-
- mate amygdala represents the positive and negative value of visual stimuli during learning. Nature 439:865–870.
- Pessoa L, Adolphs R. 2010. Emotion processing and the amygdala: from a "low road" to "many roads" of evaluating biological significance. Nat Neurosci 11:773–782.

Kandel-Ch42\_1045-1064.indd 1064

Phelps EA. 2006. Emotion and cognition: insights from studies

of the human amygdala. Annu Rev Psychol 57:27–53.

Rauch SL, Shin LM, Phelps EA. 2006. Neurocircuitry models

- of posttraumatic stress disorder and extinction: human neuroimaging research—past, present, and future. Biol
- Psychiat 60:376–382. Redondo RL, Kim J, Arons AL, Ramirez S, Liu X, Tonegawa S. 2014. Bidirectional switch of the valence associated with a hippocampal contextual memory engram. Nature
- 513:426–430. Saez A, Rigotti M, Ostojic S, Fusi S, Salzman CD. 2015 Abstract context representations in primate amygdala and prefrontal cortex. Neuron 87:869–881.
- Weiskrantz L. 1956. Behavioral changes associated with ablation of the amygdaloid complex in monkeys. J Comp Physiol Psychol 49:381–391.

10/12/20 8:04 AM


Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States

Motivational States Influence Goal-Directed Behavior

Both Internal and External Stimuli Contribute to

Motivational States

## Rewards Can Meet Both Regulatory and Nonregulatory

Needs on Short and Long Timescales The Brain's Reward Circuitry Provides a Biological

Substrate for Goal Selection Dopamine May Act as a Learning Signal

Drug Addiction Is a Pathological Reward State

All Drugs of Abuse Target Neurotransmitter Receptors, Transporters, or Ion Channels

## Repeated Exposure to a Drug of Abuse Induces Lasting

Behavioral Adaptations Lasting Molecular Adaptations Are Induced in Brain

Reward Regions by Repeated Drug Exposure Lasting Cellular and Circuit Adaptations Mediate

Aspects of the Drug-Addicted State Natural Addictions Share Biological Mechanisms With

Drug Addictions Highlights

Motivational States Influence

Goal-Directed Behavior

## O ne day a cheetah, taking refuge from the mid-day sun in the shade of a tree, views a dis-

tant antelope with apparent indifference. Later

in the afternoon, the sighting of the antelope provokes immediate orienting and stalking behavior. The stimulus is the same, but the behavioral responses are very

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1065

different. What has changed is the motivational state

of the animal.

Motivational states influence attentiveness, goal

selection, investment of effort in the pursuit of goals, and responsiveness to stimuli. They thus drive approach,

avoidance, and action selection. This chapter focuses on the neurobiological basis of motivational states related to rewards and the manner in which rewardrelated brain circuits are implicated in mechanisms underlying drug addiction. Both Internal and External Stimuli Contribute to Motivational States

## Motivational states reflect one's desires, and desires can be influenced by physiological status as well as

by stimuli that predict future rewarding and aversive

events. Motivational states thus depend on both internal and external variables. Internal variables include physiological signals concerning hunger or thirst, as well as variables related to the circadian clock. For example, the frequency and duration of foraging vary with the time of day, the time since an animal has last eaten, and whether, if female, she is lactating. Other internal variables are related to cognitive processes. In the game of blackjack, for instance, being dealt the same card in different hands can cause a

player to go bust or make 21, leading to very different emotional responses and adjustments in subsequent decision making and action selection. The differential meaning of the same stimulus (a particular card) is made possible by the cognitive understanding of the rules of the game of blackjack. The cognitive understanding of

10/12/20 8:07 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

a rule is an internal variable. Similarly, different social

situations often elicit distinct behavioral responses to

the same stimulus, such as whether one chugs wine at

a college party or sips it at a formal dinner. External variables also influence motivational states. These variables include rewarding incentive stimuli. For example, when a dehydrated cheetah comes across The Brain's Reward Circuitry Provides a Biological Substrate for Goal Selection

## Rewards are objects, stimuli, or activities that have positive value. Rewards can incite an animal to switch

from one behavior to another or to resist interruption

-of ongoing action. For example, a rat that encounters a seed while scouting the environment may cease exploring in order to eat the seed or carry it to a safer place; while nibbling the seed, the rat will resist the efforts of another rat to steal the food from its paws. If seeds are made available only at a particular location and time, the rat will go to that location as the expected moment of reward delivery approaches. Much contemporary work in neuroscience is directed at elucidating the neural systems that process different types of rewards. These systems must link

the initial sensory representation of a reward to different behaviors that respond to physiological needs and environmental challenges and opportunities. Pathologies such as addiction can highjack these reward systems, resulting in maladaptive behavior (discussed in the latter part of this chapter). Goal-directed behaviors entail the assessment of risks, costs, and benefits. Straying from the herd may offer an antelope better opportunities for foraging

a watering hole during a search for antelopes, the sight of the water may serve as an incentive stimulus, tipping the balance between hunger and thirst and driving the animal to interrupt its quest for food to drink. However, an internal variable—the state of the chee tah's hydration—can also lead to a different reward value being assigned to the same sensory stimulus, the watering hole. Even innately rewarding stimuli, such as a sweet tastant that normally elicits pleasure, can in some circumstances become unpleasurable. Chocolate cake may be innately rewarding to chocolate lovers, but satiation to the chocolate—which involves modulation of an internal variable—can decrease the reward value of this stimulus and thereby affect motivational state. Rewards Can Meet Both Regulatory and Nonregulatory Needs on Short and Long Timescales

## Feeding, drinking, and thermoregulatory behaviors and their underlying motivational states typically arise in response to (or anticipation of) a physiological imbal-

ance. In these cases, actions acquire rewards in a relatively short timescale. In contrast, some motivational states serve biological imperatives other than short-term physiological homeostasis. More complex long-term goals, such as finding and sustaining a love partner or achieving an educational or professional goal, require goal-oriented actions on longer timescales. Nonregulatory motivational states may resemble those arising from physiological signals, but motivated behaviors often involve sequences of actions in which not every action is immediately rewarded (except in the sense of making progress toward a longer-term goal). In general, incentive stimuli, even stimuli that only signal progress toward a longer-term goal, can influence motivational states so that complex behav-

ioral sequences are completed. A simple example of this concept is when a cheetah must stalk, chase, run down, and kill an antelope, and then drag the carcass to a refuge before beginning to feed. Of course, even the complexity of the actions involved in foraging and feeding is far simpler than the steps required of a student motivated to achieve a graduate degree and develop an academic career. Motivational states must be sustained across challenging circumstances in order to achieve such goals.

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1066

but only at the risk of becoming an easier target for a lurking cheetah. Attacking the venturesome antelope offers the cheetah an easier promise of a meal but at the risk that energetic and hydromineral resources will be depleted needlessly if the antelope gets away. Thus, the neural mechanisms responsible for goal selection must weigh the costs and benefits of different behaviors that might attain a specific goal. In 1954, James Olds and Peter Milner reported their work on the neural pathways responsible for rewardrelated behaviors. These classic studies employed

electrical brain stimulation as a goal. Rats and other vertebrates ranging from goldfish to humans will work for electrical stimulation of certain brain regions. The avidity and persistence of this self-stimulation are remarkable. Rats will cross electrified grids, run uphill while leaping over hurdles, or press a lever for hours on end in order to trigger the electrical stimulation. The phenomenon that leads the animal to work for self-stimulation is called brain stimulation reward (Figure 43–1A). Brain stimulation, therefore, elicits a motivational state, a strong drive to perform an action (eg, lever pressing) that will deliver further stimulation. Although brain stimulation reward is an artificial goal, it mimics some of the properties of natural goal objects. For example, brain stimulation can compete

with, summate with, or substitute for other rewardpredictive stimuli to induce motivational states that

10/12/20 8:07 AM

A

Stimulating electrode

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

Baseline


A. Classic testing apparatus for self-stimulation experiments.

In this example, an electrode is implanted in a brain region of a rodent. Lever pressing by the rodent triggers electrical

stimulation of that brain area.

- B. Brain structures that produce self-stimulation behavior typically activate dopaminergic pathways emanating from the ventral tegmental area (VTA), among other pathways.

drive goal-directed behaviors. The circuitry that medi-

ates brain stimulation reward is broadly distributed.

Rewarding effects can be produced by electrical stimu- Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States VTA

Baseline


C–D. Cocaine and nicotine affect the rate of electrical

self-stimulation. The rate at which the animal presses the

stimulation lever increases with increases in the frequency

<!-- image -->

D Nicotine


of the self-stimulation current. In the presence of the drugs, animals press the lever at lower stimulation frequencies, indicating that the drugs augment the effects of the electrical stimulation.

<!-- image -->

in the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain. These

neurons project to several areas of the brain, includ-

ing the nucleus accumbens (the major component of

lation of sites at all levels of the brain, from the olfac tory bulb to the nucleus of the solitary tract. Particularly effective sites lie along the course of the medial forebrain bundle and along longitudinally oriented fiber bundles coursing near the midline of

the brain stem. Stimulation of either of these pathways results in activation of dopaminergic neurons

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1067

-the ventral striatum), the ventromedial portion of the head of the caudate nucleus (in the dorsal striatum), the basal forebrain, and regions of the prefrontal cortex (Figure 43–1B). Activation of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area plays a crucial role in brain stimulation reward. The effects of this activation are strengthened

10/12/20 8:07 AM

B



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

by increases in dopaminergic synaptic transmission and

weakened by decreases. These dopaminergic neurons

are excited by glutamatergic cells in the prefrontal cor-

tex and amygdala as well as from cholinergic cells in the laterodorsal tegmental and pedunculopontine nuclei of the hindbrain, and are inhibited by local GABAergic cells within or just caudal to the ventral tegmental area. Brain stimulation is thought to activate dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area in part through the activation of these hindbrain cholinergic neurons. Blockade of this cholinergic input reduces the rewarding effects of the electrical stimulation. While most attention has focused on dopamine pathways in mediating brain stimulation reward, it is important to emphasize the involvement of non-dopaminergic pathways as well The strength of brain stimulation reward is indicated by the finding that starving rats provided with brief daily access to food will forego eating to press engineered so that they cannot produce dopamine—

continue to exhibit hedonic responses to sucrose.

Dopamine delivery itself is not currently considered to

produce hedonic qualities. Instead, the degree to which a particular sensory stimulus is rewarding is thought to be processed by a broad network of brain areas, spanning sensory cortices of different modalities, association cortex, prefrontal cortex (in particular, orbitofrontal regions), and many subcortical areas such as the amygdala, hippocampus, nucleus accumbens, and ventral pallidum. Many of the brain areas whose activity is modulated by reward anticipation or receipt receive dopaminergic input. What information do dopaminergic

. neurons transmit to these brain areas? Wolfram Schultz and his colleagues discovered that dopaminergic neurons often have a complex and changing pattern of responses to rewards during learning. In one experiment, Schultz trained monkeys to expect juice at a fixed interval after a visual or auditory cue. Before the monkeys learned the predictive cues, the appearance of the juice was unexpected and produced a transient increase in firing above basal levels by ventral tegmental area dopaminergic neurons. As the monkeys learned that certain cues predict the juice, the timing of the firing changed. The neurons no longer fired in response to presentation of the juice—the reward— but earlier, in response to a predictive visual or auditory cue. If a cue was presented but the reward was withheld, firing paused at the time the reward would have been presented. In contrast, if a reward exceeded expectation or was unexpected, because it appeared without a prior cue, firing was enhanced (Figure 43–2). These observations suggest that dopamine release in the forebrain serves not as a pleasure signal but as a prediction error signal. A burst of dopamine would

a lever for brain stimulation. The heedless pursuit of an artificial goal to the detriment of a biological need is one of many parallels between self-stimulation and drug abuse. Indeed, drugs of abuse augment the rewarding effects of activation of dopaminergic pathways with brain stimulation (Figure 43–1C,D). Lower frequencies of stimulating currents accompanied by cocaine or nicotine administration—both of which enhance dopaminergic neurotransmission through different mechanisms—produce a rate of lever pressing equivalent to that obtained during self-stimulation at higher stimulating currents in the absence of these drugs. These results indicate that cocaine and nicotine amplify the effects of neuronal activation elicited by microstimulation. Dopamine May Act as a Learning Signal

An earlier view of the function of dopamine was that

## it conveyed "hedonic signals" in the brain and that, in

humans, it was directly responsible for subjective pleas-

ure. From this point of view, addiction would reflect the habitual choice of short-term pleasure despite a host of long-term life problems that emerge. In fact, however, new research indicates that the hedonic principle cannot easily explain the persistence of drug use by addicted persons as negative consequences mount. The effects of dopamine have proven to be far more complex than was first thought. Dopamine can be released by aversive as well as by rewarding stim-

uli, and the short latency component of a dopamine neuron's response may not be related to the rewarding or aversive qualities of a stimulus at all. Moreover, rodents lacking dopamine—rats in which dopamine is depleted by 6-hydroxydopamine and mice genetically

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1068

signify a reward or reward-related stimulus that had not been predicted; pauses would signify that the predicted reward is less than expected or absent. If a reward is just as expected based on environmental cues, dopaminergic neurons would maintain their tonic (baseline) firing rates. Alterations in dopamine release are thus thought to modify future responses to stimuli to maximize the likelihood of obtaining rewards and to minimize fruitless pursuits. For natural rewards, like the sweet juice consumed by the monkeys in Schultz's experiments, once the environmental cues for a reward are learned, dopaminergic neuron firing returns toward baseline levels. Schultz has interpreted this to mean that as long as nothing changes in the environment, there is nothing more to learn and therefore no need to alter behavioral responses. Experiments using functional magnetic resonance imaging in humans have provided further evidence

10/12/20 8:07 AM

Unexpected reward

(no CS)

Dopaminergic

neuron of

the midbrain

R

Predicted reward

<!-- image -->


CS

(no R)

Figure 43–2 Dopaminergic neurons report an error in reward

prediction. Graphs show firing rates recorded from midbrain

dopaminergic neurons in awake, active monkeys. Top: A drop

of sweet liquid is delivered without warning to a monkey. The unexpected reward (R) elicits a response in the neurons. The reward can thus be construed as a positive error in reward prediction. Middle: The monkey has been trained that a conditioned stimulus (CS) predicts a reward. In this record, the reward occurs according to the prediction and does not elicit a response in the neurons because there is no error in the prediction of reward. The neurons are activated by the first appearance of a predicting stimulus but not by the reward . Bottom: A conditioned stimulus predicts a reward that fails to occur. The dopaminergic neurons show a decrease in firing at the time the reward would have occurred. (Reproduced, with permission, from Schultz, Dayan, and Montague 1997. Copyright © 1997 AAAS.)

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1069

2s Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States


that dopaminergic agonists and antagonists modulate

reward learning and the blood oxygen level–dependent

(BOLD) signal in the nucleus accumbens. However, in

some experiments, mice that lack a dopamine synthesis gene can still learn where to find a sugar or cocaine reward, suggesting that dopamine is not required for all forms of reward learning. In addition, rodents who receive amphetamines to elevate presynaptic dopamine levels over a more extended time interval exhibit enhanced "wanting" behavior (ie, increased responding in the presence of a Pavlovian cue predicting sucrose reward). These considerations have led some investigators to suggest that dopamine has a broader role than simply driving reinforcement learning by providing prediction-

error signals. Indeed, several recent studies have demonstrated considerable variation in the response properties of different subpopulations of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Some neurons are activated by both rewarding and aversive stimuli, while others are activated preferentially by one of the two types of stimuli, and still others show opposite responses (activated by rewards and suppressed by aversive stimuli). There is some evidence that these neuronal differences are related to differences in afferent inputs and efferent projections between subpopulations of dopaminergic neurons. Understanding the precise role of this complex mixture of dopamine signals—in learning, in driving goal-directed behavior, and especially in more complex forms of learning that involve longer timescales of sequences of actions to acquire distant rewards—remains an active area of investigation. Unlike natural rewards, addictive drugs cause dopamine release in the reward circuitry no matter how often they are consumed, and the magnitude of

this release is often greater than that seen with natural rewards—dopamine is released even when the drug no longer produces subjective pleasure. To the brain, consumption of addictive drugs might always signal "better than expected" and in this way would continue to influence behavior to maximize drug seeking and drug taking. If this idea is correct, it might explain why drug seeking and consumption become compulsive and why the life of the addicted person becomes focused increasingly on drug taking at the expense of all other pursuits. Drug Addiction Is a Pathological Reward State

Drug addiction is a chronic and sometimes fatal syn-

## drome characterized by compulsive drug seeking and

consumption despite serious negative consequences

such as medical illness and inability to function in the

10/12/20 8:07 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

family, workplace, or society. Many drug addicts are

aware of the destructive nature of their addiction but

are unable to alter their addictive behavior despite

numerous attempts at treatment. An interesting feature of drug addiction is that only a minute fraction of all chemical substances can cause the syndrome. These so-called drugs of abuse do

not share a common chemical structure, and they produce their effects by binding to different protein targets in the brain. Rather, these diverse substances can each cause a similar behavioral syndrome of addiction because their actions converge on the brain circuits that control reward and motivation (Figure 43–3). Advances in understanding these actions have come about in large part based on studies of laboratory animals that self-administer the same drugs that cause

addiction in humans. In fact, when animals are given free and unlimited access to these drugs, a subset will lose control over drug consumption—which becomes increasingly involuntary—at the expense of eating and sleeping, and some will even die by overdose. Drug self-administration and other animal models of addic tion (Box 43–1) have made it possible to study both the

Dopamine

Glutamate

<!-- image -->

(GABA)-ergic connections to and from the ventral tegmental

area (VTA) and nucleus accumbens (NAc) in the rodent brain. The primary reward circuit includes dopaminergic projections from the VTA to the NAc. The VTA projections release dopamine in response to reward-related stimuli (and in some cases aversion-related stimuli). There are also GABAergic projections from the NAc to the VTA, with some in a direct pathway innervating the VTA and some in an indirect pathway innervating the VTA via intervening GABAergic neurons in the ventral pallidum (not

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1070

neural circuitry through which drugs of abuse act to

produce their initial rewarding effects and the molecu-

lar and cellular adaptations that drugs induce in this

circuitry after repeated exposures cause an addictionlike syndrome. Over the past decade, these studies in animals, together with brain imaging studies in human addicts, have provided an increasingly complete view of the addiction process. All Drugs of Abuse Target Neurotransmitter Receptors, Transporters, or Ion Channels

## A great deal is known about the initial interactions of addictive drugs with the nervous system. Virtually all

of the proteins with which such drugs interact have

been cloned and characterized (Table 43–1). Each class of drug of abuse produces a different range of acute behavioral effects, consistent with the fact that each class acts on different targets and that

-these targets have distinct patterns of expression throughout the nervous system and peripheral tissues. Cocaine and other psychostimulants are activating and can cause cardiac side effects because their targets

rons. The NAc receives dense innervation from glutamatergic

monosynaptic circuits from the medial prefrontal cortex,

hippocampus, lateral habenula, and amygdala, among other regions. The VTA receives such inputs from the amygdala and prefrontal cortex and from several brain stem nuclei that use the transmitter acetylcholine (not shown). It also receives the peptidergic terminals of neurons in the lateral hypothalamus as well as other inputs. These various inputs control aspects of reward-related perception and memory. (Adapted from Russo and Nestler 2013.)

10/12/20 8:07 AM

Box 43–1 Animal Models of Drug Addiction

## Several animal models have played an important role in

understanding how addictive drugs produce reward acutely

and an addiction-like syndrome after repeated exposures.

Drug Self-administration The reinforcing effects of a drug can be demonstrated in

experiments in which animals perform a task (eg, press a

## lever) to receive an intravenous drug injection. In addition

to studying acquisition of this behavior, scientists assess how hard an animal will work to deliver the drug by use of progressive ratio procedures, where each successive drug dose requires an increasing number of lever presses. Animals reach a so-called break point when they stop self-administering the drug. After weeks or months of withdrawal from or extinction of drug self-administration,

animals display a relapse-like behavior: They will press the stimulation lever, which no longer delivers the drug, in response to a test dose of the drug, cues associated previously with the drug (a light or tone), or stress. These various self-administration behaviors are considered the best-validated models of human addiction. Conditioned Place Preference Animals learn to associate a particular environment

with passive exposure to drugs. For example, a rodent

(monoamine transporters) are expressed in peripheral

nerves that innervate the heart. In contrast, opiates

are sedatives and potent analgesics because their tar-

gets (opioid receptors) are expressed in sleep and pain centers. Nevertheless, all drugs of abuse acutely induce reward and reinforcement, and this shared action reflects the fact that the drugs, despite their very dif-

ferent initial targets, induce some common functional effects on the brain's reward circuitry (Figure 43–4). The best established of these shared initial effects is increased dopaminergic neurotransmission in the nucleus accumbens, albeit via different mechanisms. For example, cocaine produces this effect by blocking dopamine reuptake transporters located on the terminals of the ventral tegmental neurons, whereas opiates activate ventral tegmental area dopamine neuron cell bodies by inhibiting nearby GABAergic interneurons. Opiates also produce reward through dopamine-independent actions (eg, by activating opioid

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1071

Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States

will spend more time on the side of a box where it

was given cocaine than on the side where it received

saline. This paradigm offers an indirect measure of

potency of a drug reward and demonstrates the strong cue-conditioned effects of addictive drugs. Locomotor Sensitization All drugs of abuse stimulate locomotion in rodents upon

initial drug exposure, with increasing locomotor activa-

tion seen after repeated drug doses. Since the neural

circuitry that mediates locomotor responses to drugs of abuse partly overlaps with the circuitry that mediates reward and addiction, locomotor sensitization provides a model with which to study plasticity in this circuitry during a course of chronic drug exposure. Intracranial Self-Stimulation

Animals will work (eg, press a lever) to deliver elec-

trical current into parts of the brain's reward circuitry

(see Figure 43–1). Drugs of abuse reduce the stimula-

tion threshold for such self-stimulation, meaning that in the presence of drug animals will work for stimulation frequencies that have no effect under control conditions.

receptors on nucleus accumbens neurons themselves).

All other drugs of abuse act through a combination of

dopamine-dependent and -independent mechanisms

(eg, activation of endogenous opioid and cannabinoid signaling) to produce some of the same functional effects on nucleus accumbens neurons. Importantly, by increasing dopaminergic neurotransmission, all such drugs also produce some of the same functional effects mediated by activation of dopamine receptors on the many other projection targets of ventral tegmental dopamine neurons (Figure 43–3), actions that are also instrumental in reward and in initiating some of the deleterious actions of repeated drug exposure. Repeated Exposure to a Drug of Abuse Induces Lasting Behavioral Adaptations

## The acute rewarding actions of drugs of abuse do not account for addiction. Rather, addiction is mediated by the brain's adaptations to the repeated exposure

to such acute actions. Two main questions in the field

10/12/20 8:07 AM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Table 43–1 Major Classes of Addictive Drugs

Class

Opiates Source Opium poppy Molecular target

μ opioid receptor (agonist)


| Psychomotor stimulants  Coca leaf  Synthetic  2  Synthetic  Dopamine transporter (antagonist)  3  Cocaine  Amphetamines  Methamphetamine  Cannabinoids  Cannabis  CB1 cannabinoid receptors (agonist)  Marijuana  Nicotine  Tobacco  Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (agonist)  Tobacco  Ethyl alcohol  Fermentation  GABA  A  receptor (agonist), NMDA-type glu-  tamate receptor (antagonist), and  multiple other targets  Various beverages  Phencyclidine-like drugs  Synthetic  NMDA-type glutamate receptor (antagonist)  Sedative/hypnotics  Synthetic  GABA  A  receptor (positive allosteric modulator) Barbiturates, benzodiazepines  Inhalants  Varied  Unknown  Glues, gasoline, nitrous oxide,  others  1  The signaling pathways induced by μ receptor activation differ between opiates, differences that might be related to different addiction liabilities.  Additionally, most opiates activate the δ opioid receptor, although the action at μ receptors is most important for reward and addiction.  2  The original synthesis of amphetamine was based on the natural plant product ephedrine.  3   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Examples

Morphine, methadone,

oxycodone, heroin, many others

Phencyclidine (PCP, angel dust)

While cocaine is an antagonist of the transporter, amphetamine and methamphetamine act differently: They are substrates for the

transporter and, once in the nerve terminal cytoplasm, act to stimulate dopamine release.

GABA , γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA , N-methyl-d-aspartate.

Note: Caffeine can produce mild physical dependence but does not result in compulsive use. Some illegal drugs that are abused can be harmful but do not generally produce addiction; these include the hallucinogens lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), mescaline, psilocybin, and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), popularly known as ecstasy.

remain: What specific adaptations mediate the behavin response to repeated drug administration and is

ioral syndrome of addiction, and why are some indi-

viduals more likely to become addicted?

We know—in both animals and humans—that roughly 50% of the risk for addiction across all drugs of abuse is genetic, but the specific genes that confer risk

remain largely unknown. As for most other common chronic conditions, the genetic risk for addiction is highly complex, reflecting the combined actions of hundreds of genetic variations, each of which has a very small effect. The other 50% of the risk, while incompletely understood, involves a host of environmental factors including early life stress, stress throughout life, and peer pressure. Historically, the adaptations induced by repeated drug exposure have been described by a series of pharmacological terms. Tolerance refers to the dimin-

ishing effect of a drug after repeated administration at the same dose or to the need for an increase in dose to produce the same effect. Sensitization, also known as reverse tolerance, occurs when repeated administration of the same drug dose elicits escalating effects. Dependence is defined as an adaptive state that develops

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1072

unmasked during withdrawal, which occurs when drug

taking stops. The symptoms of withdrawal vary from

drug to drug and include effects opposite to a drug's acute actions. Tolerance, sensitization, and dependence/withdrawal are seen with many drugs that are not addicting. For instance, two drugs used to treat hypertension, the β-adrenergic antagonist propranolol and the α 2 -adrenergic agonist clonidine, produce strong dependence as evidenced by severe hypertension upon their sudden withdrawal. Drugs of abuse are unique in causing tolerance, sensitization, and dependence/withdrawal in rewardand motivation-related behaviors, and these behaviors

contribute to the syndrome of addiction. Reward tolerance, which can be viewed as homeostatic suppression of endogenous reward mechanisms in response to repeated drug exposure, is one factor leading to escalating patterns of drug use. Motivational dependence, which is manifested as negative emotional (eg, depression- and anxiety-like) symptoms seen during early drug withdrawal and also mediated by

10/12/20 8:07 AM
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Table 43–1 Major Classes of Addictive Drugs

Class

Opiates Source Opium poppy Molecular target

μ opioid receptor (agonist)


| Psychomotor stimulants  Coca leaf  Synthetic  2  Synthetic  Dopamine transporter (antagonist)  3  Cocaine  Amphetamines  Methamphetamine  Cannabinoids  Cannabis  CB1 cannabinoid receptors (agonist)  Marijuana  Nicotine  Tobacco  Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (agonist)  Tobacco  Ethyl alcohol  Fermentation  GABA  A  receptor (agonist), NMDA-type glu-  tamate receptor (antagonist), and  multiple other targets  Various beverages  Phencyclidine-like drugs  Synthetic  NMDA-type glutamate receptor (antagonist)  Sedative/hypnotics  Synthetic  GABA  A  receptor (positive allosteric modulator) Barbiturates, benzodiazepines  Inhalants  Varied  Unknown  Glues, gasoline, nitrous oxide,  others  1  The signaling pathways induced by μ receptor activation differ between opiates, differences that might be related to different addiction liabilities.  Additionally, most opiates activate the δ opioid receptor, although the action at μ receptors is most important for reward and addiction.  2  The original synthesis of amphetamine was based on the natural plant product ephedrine.  3   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Examples

Morphine, methadone,

oxycodone, heroin, many others

Phencyclidine (PCP, angel dust)

While cocaine is an antagonist of the transporter, amphetamine and methamphetamine act differently: They are substrates for the

transporter and, once in the nerve terminal cytoplasm, act to stimulate dopamine release.

GABA , γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA , N-methyl-d-aspartate.

Note: Caffeine can produce mild physical dependence but does not result in compulsive use. Some illegal drugs that are abused can be harmful but do not generally produce addiction; these include the hallucinogens lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), mescaline, psilocybin, and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), popularly known as ecstasy.

remain: What specific adaptations mediate the behavin response to repeated drug administration and is

ioral syndrome of addiction, and why are some indi-

viduals more likely to become addicted?

We know—in both animals and humans—that roughly 50% of the risk for addiction across all drugs of abuse is genetic, but the specific genes that confer risk

remain largely unknown. As for most other common chronic conditions, the genetic risk for addiction is highly complex, reflecting the combined actions of hundreds of genetic variations, each of which has a very small effect. The other 50% of the risk, while incompletely understood, involves a host of environmental factors including early life stress, stress throughout life, and peer pressure. Historically, the adaptations induced by repeated drug exposure have been described by a series of pharmacological terms. Tolerance refers to the dimin-

ishing effect of a drug after repeated administration at the same dose or to the need for an increase in dose to produce the same effect. Sensitization, also known as reverse tolerance, occurs when repeated administration of the same drug dose elicits escalating effects. Dependence is defined as an adaptive state that develops

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1072

unmasked during withdrawal, which occurs when drug

taking stops. The symptoms of withdrawal vary from

drug to drug and include effects opposite to a drug's acute actions. Tolerance, sensitization, and dependence/withdrawal are seen with many drugs that are not addicting. For instance, two drugs used to treat hypertension, the β-adrenergic antagonist propranolol and the α 2 -adrenergic agonist clonidine, produce strong dependence as evidenced by severe hypertension upon their sudden withdrawal. Drugs of abuse are unique in causing tolerance, sensitization, and dependence/withdrawal in rewardand motivation-related behaviors, and these behaviors

contribute to the syndrome of addiction. Reward tolerance, which can be viewed as homeostatic suppression of endogenous reward mechanisms in response to repeated drug exposure, is one factor leading to escalating patterns of drug use. Motivational dependence, which is manifested as negative emotional (eg, depression- and anxiety-like) symptoms seen during early drug withdrawal and also mediated by

10/12/20 8:07 AM

A Self-reported craving


Craving score 8 6 4

<!-- image -->

Cocaine

cues

B Change in metabolic rate


Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex


- 5

Craving



<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

r = 0.66

p &lt; 0.02

DLPFC

<!-- image -->

1.5


r = 0.66

p &lt; 0.02

21.5

<!-- image -->

Figure 43–4 Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging Cocaine cues plots the difference between the average of the responses to

reveals neural correlates of cue-induced cocaine craving.

(Adapted, with permission, from Grant et al. 1996.)

A. Subjects were shown neutral or cocaine-related cues and asked, "How do you rate your craving or urge for cocaine on a scale of 1–10?" The mean craving score (horizontal bar) is sig-

nificantly higher for exposure to cocaine-related cues than for exposure to neutral stimuli, even though the magnitude of the response across individuals varies considerably. Two subjects, identified by red and blue dots, represent high-level and lowlevel craving, respectively. B. Changes in self-reported craving are correlated with changes in metabolic rate in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe during exposure to cocaine-related cues. The abscissa plots the difference in metabolic rate between

the two sessions (activity with cocaine cues minus activity with neutral cues). Metabolic rate is measured as the regional cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (rCMRglc). The ordinate

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1073

the question, "Do you have a craving or urge for cocaine?" in

separate sessions with neutral and cocaine-related cues. (Each

session lasted 30 minutes, and in each session, the question was asked three times.) C. When subjects report a craving for cocaine, metabolic activity increases in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and in two medial temporal lobe structures, the amygdala (Am)

and parahippocampal gyrus (Ph). Pseudocolored PET images of metabolic activity are spatially aligned with high-resolution structural magnetic resonance images. Metabolic rate markedly increased in the amygdala and parahippocampal gyrus in one subject who reported a large increase in craving during presentation of cocaine-related cues (red dots in parts A and B). This effect is not evident in a subject who reported no increase in craving while exposed to the cocaine-related cues (blue dots in parts A and B). Metabolic activity outside the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe is not shown.

10/12/20 8:07 AM

Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States


High craver



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

suppressed endogenous reward mechanisms, is a lead-

ing factor in driving the return to drug use, or relapse

.

Reward sensitization, which typically occurs after longer

withdrawal periods, can trigger relapse in response to exposure to the drug itself or to drug-associated cues (eg, being with people or in a place where drug was previously used). Interestingly, a given drug can produce all of these adaptations—tolerance, sensitization, and dependence— simultaneously, due to different acute effects of the

drug; this phenomenon emphasizes the involvement of multiple cell types and circuits in mediating a drug's global actions. The key challenge for neuroscientists is to identify the changes in specific types of neurons and glia—and in their consequent contributions to circuit function—that are induced by repeated drug exposure and that mediate the behavioral features that define a state of addiction. Lasting Molecular Adaptations Are Induced in Brain Reward Regions by Repeated Drug Exposure

## An extensive literature shows that repeated exposure to a drug of abuse in animal models alters the levels of many neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors,

their receptors and intracellular signaling pathways, and transcriptional regulatory proteins throughout the brain's reward circuitry. Most of these changes cannot be studied in living patients—only a small number of neurotransmitters and receptors can be assessed in patients with brain imaging—although studies of postmortem human brain tissue are being used increasingly to validate findings from animal models. Most of the reported research has focused on the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens, although an increasing number of studies are examining other parts of the reward circuitry. The most robust experimental findings are available for psychostimulants and opiates, probably because the changes induced by these drugs are larger in magnitude

than those of other drugs of abuse. This likely reflects the greater inherent addictiveness of psychostimulants and opiates: With equivalent exposures, a larger fraction of people will become addicted to these drugs as compared with other classes of abused substances. Nevertheless, given the dominant public health consequences of alcohol, nicotine, and marijuana addictions, more attention should be given to these drugs. Below, we summarize this large literature by focusing on a small number of drug-induced adaptations that have been linked causally to specific behav-

ioral features of addiction in animal models. As will be clear in the next section, the present research focus is

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1074

on relating these and many other molecular changes

to synaptic and circuit adaptations also implicated in

addiction.

Upregulation of the cAMP-CREB Pathway

Several drugs of abuse activate G


protein–linked

## receptors, such as the D 2 dopamine receptor; the μ, δ, and κ opioid receptors; and the CB1 cannabinoid

receptor. This means that, to a certain extent, many drugs of abuse will activate G i protein–linked signaling pathways, with effects such as inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (Chapter 14), in the nucleus accumbens and other target neurons. Work over the past two decades has established that, after repeated exposure, the affected neurons adapt to this sustained suppression of the cyclic aden-

osine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway by upregulating it, including induction of certain isoforms of adenylyl cyclase and protein kinase A. Repeated drug exposure likewise induces upregulation of the transcription factor CREB, which is normally activated by the cAMP pathway. Such upregulation of the cAMPCREB pathway can be seen as a molecular mechanism of tolerance and dependence: It restores normal activity of these pathways despite the presence of a drug (tolerance and dependence), and when the drug is removed, the upregulated pathway is unopposed, causing abnormally high activity of the pathway (withdrawal) (Figure 43–5). Indeed, upregulation of the cAMP-CREB pathway in nucleus accumbens neurons has been shown to mediate both reward tolerance and motivational dependence and withdrawal in animal models. Induction of ∆FosB

∆FosB is a member of the Fos family of transcription

factors. It is a truncated product of the FosB gene gen-

erated through alternative splicing. In contrast to all

other members of the Fos family, which are induced rapidly and transiently in response to many perturbations in neural activity or cell signaling, ∆FosB is induced only slightly by initial presentation of stimuli. However, with repeated drug exposure, ∆FosB accumulates in neurons because of its unusual stability, unique among all Fos family proteins. This phenomenon occurs within neurons of the nucleus accumbens and several other brain reward areas after repeated exposure to virtually any drug of

abuse, including cocaine and other psychomotor stimulants, opiates, nicotine, ethanol, cannabinoids, and phencyclidine. Recent studies involving the selective

10/12/20 8:07 AM

Adenylyl cyclase, Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States


Lasting Cellular and Circuit Adaptations Mediate

Aspects of the Drug-Addicted State

<!-- image -->

## Withdrawal Repeated exposure to a drug of abuse can alter a neural circuit in two major ways. One mechanism, referred to as whole-cell or homeostatic plasticity, involves alter-

ing the intrinsic excitability of a nerve cell that will ultimately alter functioning of the larger circuit of which it is a part. It is easy to imagine how whole-cell plasticity in neurons within the brain's reward circuitry might mediate aspects of reward tolerance, sensitization, and dependence and withdrawal. The other mechanism is synaptic plasticity, where connections between particular neurons are either strengthened or weakened. These synapse-specific

dependence. Morphine or other μ opioid receptor agonists adaptations could mediate the features of addiction that involve maladaptive memories, such as memories of the association of drug exposure with a host of environmental cues. This pathological learning and memory can increasingly focus an individual on the drug at the expense of natural rewards. Most attention in the field to date has concentrated on synaptic plasticity. Synaptic Plasticity As discussed elsewhere in this book, two major forms of synaptic plasticity have been described at gluta- matergic synapses: long-term depression (LTD) and

acutely inhibit the functional activity of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway in brain reward neurons, as indicated, for example, by cellular levels of cAMP or protein kinase A (PKA)–dependent phosphorylation of substrates such as CREB. With continued drug exposure (shading), functional activity of the cAMP-CREB pathway is gradually upregulated and increases far above control levels upon removal of the drug (eg, by administration of the μ opioid receptor antagonist naloxone). These changes in the functional state of the cAMP-CREB pathway are mediated via the induction of adenylyl cyclase and PKA and activation of PKA substrates such as CREB in response to repeated drug administration. Induction of these proteins accounts for the gradual recovery in the functional activity of the cAMP-CREB pathway seen during chronic drug exposure (tolerance and dependence) and for the elevated activity of the cAMP-CREB pathway seen upon removal of the drug (withdrawal). First demonstrated for opiate drugs, similar regulation is seen in response to several other types of drugs of abuse. (Reproduced, with permission, from Nestler et al. 2020.) expression or knockdown of ∆FosB in the nucleus

accumbens of adult mice have provided direct evi-

dence that induction of ∆FosB mediates reward sensi

tization, including increased drug self-administration and relapse. This is yet another example of a common adaptation to drugs of abuse that contributes to aspects of addiction shared across numerous drugs of abuse. CREB and ∆FosB are two of many transcription factors implicated in drug addiction. Ongoing research is focused on characterizing the chromatin regulatory

-long-term potentiation (LTP). Over the past two decades, the molecular basis of both adaptations has been established, with distinct mechanisms underlying each of several distinct subtypes of LTD and LTP that occur throughout the nervous system. We now know that several types of drugs of abuse, in particular psychomotor stimulants and opiates, cause LTD- and LTP-like changes at particular classes of glutamatergic synapses in the brain's reward circuitry, with most work to date focused on the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens. Changes in the nucleus accumbens show interesting time-dependent adaptations as a function of drug withdrawal. At early withdrawal points (hours

mechanisms through which these factors cooperate to regulate the expression of specific genes in the affected neurons and glia. Work is also underway to understand how these target genes drive their associated behavioral abnormalities via altered expression of proteins involved in synaptic, cell, and circuit function (Figure 43–6).

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1075

to days), glutamatergic synapses on neurons of the nucleus accumbens display LTD-like changes, which evolve into LTP-like changes after longer periods of withdrawal (weeks to months). Drug-induced LTDand LTP-like adaptations in the nucleus accumbens involve morphological changes similar to those in other brain regions (mostly the hippocampus and cerebral cortex) where LTD and LTP occur in association with morphological changes in individual dendritic spines. During early withdrawal, LTD-like responses occur coincidently with increased numbers of

10/12/20 8:07 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

other chromatin regulatory proteins and thereby activates the

RNA polymerase II–dependent transcription of many genes,

<!-- image -->

lular signaling pathways implicated in drug addiction.

NMDA-type glutamate receptors permit Ca

2+

2+

entry, which

binds calmodulin. The Ca /calmodulin complex activates two types of Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent protein kinases, CaMKII in the cytoplasm and CaMKIV in the cell nucleus. Certain dopamine receptors activate a stimulatory G protein that in turn activates adenylyl cyclase to produce cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). The cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunit can enter the nucleus. Once activated in the nucleus, both PKA and CaMKIV phosphorylate and thus activate cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). CREB recruits CREB-binding protein (CBP) and many

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1076

giving rise to proteins that can alter cellular function. Arc and

Homer are localized in synaptic regions; mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases are protein kinases that control numerous cellular processes; Fos and ∆FosB are transcription factors; and dynorphin is a type of endogenous opioid peptide. These proteins are thought to contribute both to homeostatic responses to excessive dopamine stimulation and to the morphological and functional changes in synapses associated with memory formation. (Abbreviations: ATP, adenosine triphosphate; NMDA , N-methyl-d-aspartate; POL 2, RNA polymerase 2; TBP, TATA binding protein.)

10/12/20 8:07 AM

immature, thin dendritic spines, whereas during later

withdrawal, LTP-like responses occur coincidently

with increased numbers of mature, mushroom-shaped

spines. These findings suggest that repeated drug use weakens certain glutamatergic synapses with nucleus accumbens neurons via the induction of so-called silent synapses (Chapter 54), with a subset of these synapses strengthening during prolonged withdrawal. These advances now define several ongoing lines of investigation. We need to understand which particular glutamatergic connections are affected and

how those changes contribute to behavioral features of addiction. We need to define the molecular basis of this time-dependent synaptic plasticity, which is mediated in part through transcriptional mechanisms and altered expression levels of a host of proteins, including glutamate receptors, postsynaptic density proteins, proteins that regulate the actin cytoskeleton, and so on (Figure 43–6). In addition, we need to examine druginduced glutamatergic synaptic plasticity at the several other reward-related brain regions that become corrupted in an addicted state, beyond the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens. Finally, we need to understand how repeated exposure to drugs of abuse also corrupts inhibitory GABAergic synaptic transmission throughout this circuitry. Whole-Cell Plasticity

As with synaptic plasticity, most examples of drug-

induced whole-cell plasticity involve the ventral teg-

mental area and nucleus accumbens. For example, Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States


behavioral consequences (Chapter 5). This is enabling

scientists to define the precise ensembles of neurons

within a given brain region that are affected by drug

exposure over the life cycle of addiction—from initial drug exposure to compulsive drug consumption to withdrawal and relapse—and to provide causal evidence for the involvement of those neurons and the microcircuits within which they function. This work is beginning to define the distinct roles that various glutamatergic projections to the nucleus accumbens— from the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and thalamus—play in controlling different cell types in the nucleus accumbens and the broader reward circuitry and in producing distinct addiction-related behavioral abnormalities. While we have focused exclusively in this chapter on the effects of acute and chronic actions of drugs of abuse on the neural control of behavior, we real -

ize that this is an oversimplification. As discussed in Chapter 7, neuronal function is intricately controlled by a host of nonneural cells in the brain, including astroglia, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and endothelial cells. There is growing evidence that each of these cell types is affected both directly and indirectly by drugs of abuse and that these nonneuronal actions also affect the long-term behavioral consequences of drug exposure. Integrating such actions with the neuronal effects of drugs of abuse will be required to achieve a comprehensive understanding of addiction. Natural Addictions Share Biological Mechanisms With Drug Addictions

## + As previously indicated, the brain's reward circuitry evolved to motivate individuals to pursue natural rewards such as food, sex, and social interactions.

-Just as drug-addicted individuals display compulsive consumption of drugs of abuse, some people exhibit compulsive consumption of nondrug rewards (eg, compulsive overeating, shopping, gambling, video gaming, and sex), with behavioral consequences very similar to those observed in drug addiction. An interesting question for the field is whether these so-called "natural addictions" are mediated by some of the same molecular, cellular, and circuit adaptations that underlie drug addiction. It is possible that these normal pleasurable behaviors excessively activate reward mechanisms in certain individuals who are particularly susceptible due to

repeated cocaine exposure increases the intrinsic excitability of nucleus accumbens neurons, which contributes to reward tolerance. This adaptation is due in part to a decrease in expression of specific types of K channels mediated by CREB, thus linking moleculartranscriptional adaptations to altered neural activity and an addiction-related behavioral abnormality. Repeated opiate exposure also increases the intrinsic excitability of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area, but in a manner that impedes dopaminergic transmission to the nucleus accumbens. As with repeated cocaine exposure, this adaptation too is mediated by suppression of certain K + channels and contrib utes to reward tolerance. Circuit Plasticity

Advanced tools are making it possible for the first time

to track the activity of specific nerve cell types in the

brain in awake, active animals and to experimentally

manipulate the activity of those cells and study the

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1077

genetic or nongenetic factors. As with drugs, such activation may result in profound alterations in motivation that promote the repetition of initially rewarding behavior, despite the impact of negative consequences

10/12/20 8:07 AM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

associated with the resulting compulsive behavior. It

is far more difficult to study the neurobiological basis

of natural addictions because of limitations in animal

models (imagine a mouse model of compulsive shopping!), although progress is being made in developing such paradigms. In any event, brain imaging studies in humans support the notion that addictions to both drugs and behavioral rewards are associated with similar dysregulation of the brain's reward circuitry (Figure 43–3). Highlights

1.

Motivational states drive behaviors that either

seek rewards or defend against or avoid aver-

sive stimuli. Motivational states themselves are

- determined by a variety of internal and external variables. Internal variables include both physiological states and cognitive states. External variables include stimuli that possess innately rewarding or aversive properties, although the motivational significance of these properties may be modified by internal variables. 2. Rewards are desirable objects, stimuli, or actions. Rewards tend to elicit motivational states that drive approach behaviors. Rewards can meet
- regulatory needs on a short timescale, but can also result from complex sequences of behavior that achieve a long-term goal. 3. Key components of reward-related circuitry in the brain include dopaminergic neurons and brain areas targeted by dopaminergic neurons,
- such as the nucleus accumbens, ventral pallidum, amygdala, hippocampus, and parts of the prefrontal cortex. However, dopamine itself does not account for hedonic experiences. 4. Many dopaminergic neurons exhibit physiological response properties that suggest they communicate a prediction-error signal, with enhanced
- activity occurring when something better than expected occurs. This type of signal could play a critical role in different forms of reinforcement learning, learning that links stimuli or actions to rewards. However, recent studies have revealed more response heterogeneity in dopaminergic neurons than previously appreciated, including responses to aversive stimuli. This heterogeneity and its complex effects on neural circuit function remain active areas of investigation. 5. Drug addiction can be defined as the compulsive seeking and taking of a drug despite negative consequences to one's physical health or

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1078

occupational and social functioning. The risk

for addiction is roughly 50% genetic, with many

hundreds of genes, each of which contributes

- a very small effect to this heritability. Important nongenetic risk factors include a history of adverse life events. 6. Drugs of abuse compose only a very small fraction of known chemical compounds. These drugs are chemically diverse, with each type acting ini-
- tially on a distinct protein target. Nevertheless, the drugs can induce a common behavioral syndrome because their actions at these targets converge in producing similar functional effects on midbrain dopaminergic neurons or their projection regions such as the nucleus accumbens. 7. Addiction requires repeated exposure to a drug of abuse. Such repeated exposure is often accompanied by tolerance, sensitization, and dependence/
- withdrawal. While many nonabused drugs can produce tolerance and dependence/withdrawal, drugs of abuse are unique in their ability to produce these adaptations as well as sensitization in motivational and reward states. 8. The adaptations underlying drug addiction are mediated in part through lasting changes in gene expression, which result in altered intrinsic activ-
- ity of neurons as well as structural and functional alterations in their synaptic contacts within the brain's reward circuitry. 9. An important goal of current research is to understand how a myriad of molecular changes summate to underlie specific changes in neural and
- synaptic function. Likewise, it will be important to understand how these neural and synaptic changes combine to alter the functioning of the brain's larger reward-related circuitry, so as to mediate specific behavioral abnormalities that define an addicted state. 10. This delineation of molecular, cellular, and circuit mechanisms of addiction will require increased attention to the specific cell types (neuronal and
- nonneuronal) in which certain drug-induced adaptations occur and to the specific microcircuits within the reward pathways affected by those adaptations. 11. A subset of individuals show addiction-like behavioral abnormalities to nondrug rewards, such as food, gambling, and sex. Evidence sug-
- gests that such so-called natural addictions are mediated by the same brain circuitry involved in drug addiction, with some common molecular and cellular abnormalities implicated as well. 12. These considerations highlight the need to learn more about the precise molecular, cellular, and

10/12/20 8:07 AM

circuit bases of drug addiction. Nonetheless, our

evolving understanding of the brain's reward

circuitry and how individual synapses and cells

in that circuitry are altered by drug exposure in a way that corrupts circuit function and usurps normal systems of reward and associative memory provides a compelling notion of what happens in the addicted brain.

Selected Reading

Berridge KC, Robinson TE. 2016. Liking, wanting, incentive-

sensitization theory of addiction. Am Psychologist 71:

## 670–679.

- Di Chiara G. 1998. A motivational learning hypothesis of the role of mesolimbic dopamine in compulsive drug use. J Psychopharmacol 12:54–67.
- Hyman SE, Malenka RC, Nestler EJ. 2006. Neural mechanisms of addiction: the role of reward-related learning and memory. Annu Rev Neurosci 29:565–598.
- Olds J, Milner PM. 1954. Positive reinforcement produced by electrical stimulation of septal area and other regions of rat brain. J Comp Physiol Psych 47:419–427.
- Schultz W. 2015. Neuronal reward and decision signals: from theories to data. Physiol Rev 95:853–951. Wise RA, Koob GF. 2014. The development and mainte-
- nance of drug addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology 39:254–262.
- References

Bevilacqua L, Goldman D. 2013. Genetics of impulsive

behavior. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368:20120380.

Calipari ES, Bagot RC, Purushothaman I, et al. 2016. In vivo

- imaging identifies temporal signature of D1 and D2 medium spiny neurons in cocaine reward. Proc Natl Acad
- Sci U S A 113:2726–2731. Carlezon WA Jr, Chartoff EH. 2007. Intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) in rodents to study the neurobiology of motivation. Nat Protoc 2:2987–2995.
- Dong Y. 2016. Silent synapse-based circuitry remodeling in drug addiction. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 19:pyv136. Everitt BJ, Belin D, Economidou D, Pelloux Y, Dalley JW,
- Robbins TW. 2008. Review. Neural mechanisms underlying

Kandel-Ch43\_1065-1079.indd 1079

Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States


the vulnerability to develop compulsive drug-seeking

habits and addiction. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci

363:3125–3135.

- Gipson CD, Kupchik YM, Kalivas PW. 2014. Rapid, transient synaptic plasticity in addiction. Neuropharmacology 76 Pt B:276–286.
- Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND. 2011. Dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex in addiction: neuroimaging findings and clinical implications. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:652–669.
- Grant S, London ED, Newlin DB, et al. 1996. Activation of memory circuits during cue-elicited cocaine cravings. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:12040–12045.
- Eric J. Nestler Loweth JA, Tseng KY, Wolf ME. 2014. Adaptations in AMPA receptor transmission in the nucleus accumbens contributing to incubation of cocaine craving. Neuropharmacology

C. Daniel Salzman

- 76 Pt B:287–300. Lüscher C, Malenka RC. 2011. Drug-evoked synaptic plasticity in addiction: from molecular changes to circuit remodeling. Neuron 69:650–663.
- Matsumoto M, Hikosaka O. 2009. Two types of dopamine neuron distinctly convey positive and negative motivational signals. Nature 459:837–841.
- Nestler EJ, Kenny PJ, Russo SJ, Schaefer A. 2020. Molecular Neuropharmacology: A Foundation for Clinical Neuroscience , 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Pessiglione M, Seymour B, Flandin G, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. 2006. Dopamine-dependent prediction errors underpin reward-seeking behavior in humans. Nature 442:
- 1042–1045. Polter AM, Kauer JA. 2014. Stress and VTA synapses: implications for addiction and depression. Eur J Neurosci 39:1179–1188.
- Robbins TW, Clark L. 2015. Behavioral addictions. Curr Opin Neurobiol 30:66–72. Robinson TE, Kolb B. 2004. Structural plasticity associated
- with exposure to drugs of abuse. Neuropharmacology 47(Suppl 1):33–46.
- Robison AJ, Nestler EJ. 2011. Transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms of addiction. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:623–637. Russo SJ, Nestler EJ. 2013. The brain reward circuitry in
- mood disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci 14:609–625. Schmidt HD, McGinty JF, West AE, Sadri-Vakili G. 2013.
- Epigenetics and psychostimulant addiction. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 3:a012047.
- Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. 1997. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science 275:1593–1599. Scofield MD, Kalivas PW. 2014. Astrocytic dysfunction and
- addiction: consequences of impaired glutamate homeostasis. Neuroscientist 20:610–622.
- Stuber GD, Britt JP, Bonci A. 2012. Optogenetic modulation of neural circuits that underlie reward seeking. Biol Psychiatry 71:1061–1067.
- Volkow ND, Morales M. 2015. The brain on drugs: from reward to addiction. Cell 162:712–725.

10/12/20 8:07 AM


Sleep and Wakefulness

Sleep Consists of Alternating Periods of REM Sleep

and Non-REM Sleep

The Ascending Arousal System Promotes Wakefulness

## The Ascending Arousal System in the Brain Stem and Hypothalamus Innervates the Forebrain

## Damage to the Ascending Arousal System

Causes Coma Circuits Composed of Mutually Inhibitory Neurons

Control Transitions From Wake to Sleep and From Non-REM to REM Sleep

Sleep Is Regulated by Homeostatic and Circadian Drives The Homeostatic Pressure for Sleep Depends on Humoral Factors

## Circadian Rhythms Are Controlled by a Biological Clock

in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus Circadian Control of Sleep Depends on

Hypothalamic Relays Sleep Loss Impairs Cognition and Memory

Sleep Changes With Age

Disruptions in Sleep Circuitry Contribute to Many Sleep Disorders

Insomnia May Be Caused by Incomplete Inhibition of the

## Arousal System Sleep Apnea Fragments Sleep and Impairs Cognition

Narcolepsy Is Caused by a Loss of Orexinergic Neurons

REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Is Caused by Failure of REM Sleep Paralysis Circuits

Restless Legs Syndrome and Periodic Limb Movement

Disorder Disrupt Sleep Non-REM Parasomnias Include Sleepwalking, Sleep

Talking, and Night Terrors

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1080

Sleep Has Many Functions

Highlights

S

leep is a remarkable state.

It consumes fully a

third of our lives—approximately 25 years in the

average lifetime—yet we know little about what

happens in the brain during this daily excursion. Perhaps even more surprising, the exact functions of sleep and of dreaming, one of the more noteworthy components of sleep, are still unknown. Although the psychological content of dreams has been a rich subject of speculation from Plato and Aristotle to Sigmund Freud, we still do not understand

whether dreams carry deep personal meaning, as Freud hypothesized, or represent the brain "throwing out its trash," the bits and pieces of daily experience that are not worth retaining, as Francis Crick speculated. One function of sleep may be to allow synaptic remodeling and consolidation of memory traces reflecting the day's experiences, but the role of dreaming in this process remains a subject of intense debate. When studying sleep and wakefulness, researchers typically use a polysomnogram, which consists of three physiological measures: brain activity measured

by an electroencephalogram (EEG) (see Figure 58–1), eye movements recorded by an electro-oculogram (EOG), and muscle tone measured by an electromyogram (EMG) (Figure 44–1B). In clinical polysomnograms, respiration is also measured, as breathing during sleep is disrupted in many patients with sleep disorders.

12/12/20 3:25 PM

Figure 44–1 Electrophysiological pat-

terns of wakefulness and sleep.

A. A hypnogram or graph showing the

## progression of sleep stages over a typical night in a healthy young person. Periods

of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep alternate with non-REM sleep about every 90 minutes. An individual typically progresses from the awake state into light non-REM sleep (N1) then progressively deeper nonREM sleep (N2, N3), then back to lighter non-REM sleep before the first period of REM sleep occurs (light blue bars). As the night progresses, the individual spends less time in the deepest stage of non-REM sleep, and the duration of REM sleep periods increases. B. The records show the components of the polysomnogram used to distinguish sleep stages. The electro-oculogram (EOG)

records eye movements from electrodes on either side of the eyes. The electroencephalogram (EEG) records cortical field potentials from the scalp; the electromyogram (EMG) records muscle fiber firing through the skin. During the awake state, the EOG shows voluntary eye movements, the EEG shows fast low-amplitude activity, and the EMG shows variable muscle tone. Stage N1 sleep is characterized by a slight slowing of EEG frequencies and slow roving eye movements, with less EMG activity; stage N2 is characterized by bursts of 12- to 14-Hz activity called sleep spindles and high-voltage slow waves called K-complexes; stage N3 is dominated by high-voltage slow waves. During REM sleep, the EEG is similar to that of the awake state. Rapid eye movements can be seen on the EOG, but the EMG is so silent that contamination by tiny electrocardiogram signals can sometimes be seen (as in the illustrated case).

During wakefulness, the EEG is characterized by REM

REM

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness

REM

REM REM

A Hypnogram

Awake

REM

<!-- image -->

mainly high-frequency, low-voltage activity, indica-

tive of the unique activity of individual cortical neu-



from light drowsiness to deep sleep, is referred to as

non-REM sleep and is divided into three stages, N1 to

-N3 (Figure 44–1). Sleep Consists of Alternating Periods of REM

Sleep and Non-REM Sleep

## As an individual becomes drowsy and transitions into light non-REM sleep (stage N1), the EEG slows and

shows waves in the theta range (4−7 Hz) (Figure 44–1B).

12/12/20 3:25 PM

rons; the EOG shows frequent eye movements; and the EMG shows moderate and variable muscle tone. Dur ing quiet wakefulness, with eyes closed, rhythmic EEG waves in the alpha range (8–13 Hz) are common, particularly over the occipital region. For most of the sleep period, the EEG shows slower activity, but periodically during the night, there are shifts into a sleep state with a faster, lower-voltage EEG, loss of muscle tone, and rapid eye movements called rapid eye movement

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1081
Figure 44–1 Electrophysiological pat-

terns of wakefulness and sleep.

A. A hypnogram or graph showing the

## progression of sleep stages over a typical night in a healthy young person. Periods

of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep alternate with non-REM sleep about every 90 minutes. An individual typically progresses from the awake state into light non-REM sleep (N1) then progressively deeper nonREM sleep (N2, N3), then back to lighter non-REM sleep before the first period of REM sleep occurs (light blue bars). As the night progresses, the individual spends less time in the deepest stage of non-REM sleep, and the duration of REM sleep periods increases. B. The records show the components of the polysomnogram used to distinguish sleep stages. The electro-oculogram (EOG)

records eye movements from electrodes on either side of the eyes. The electroencephalogram (EEG) records cortical field potentials from the scalp; the electromyogram (EMG) records muscle fiber firing through the skin. During the awake state, the EOG shows voluntary eye movements, the EEG shows fast low-amplitude activity, and the EMG shows variable muscle tone. Stage N1 sleep is characterized by a slight slowing of EEG frequencies and slow roving eye movements, with less EMG activity; stage N2 is characterized by bursts of 12- to 14-Hz activity called sleep spindles and high-voltage slow waves called K-complexes; stage N3 is dominated by high-voltage slow waves. During REM sleep, the EEG is similar to that of the awake state. Rapid eye movements can be seen on the EOG, but the EMG is so silent that contamination by tiny electrocardiogram signals can sometimes be seen (as in the illustrated case).

During wakefulness, the EEG is characterized by REM

REM

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness

REM

REM REM

A Hypnogram

Awake

REM

<!-- image -->

mainly high-frequency, low-voltage activity, indica-

tive of the unique activity of individual cortical neu-



from light drowsiness to deep sleep, is referred to as

non-REM sleep and is divided into three stages, N1 to

-N3 (Figure 44–1). Sleep Consists of Alternating Periods of REM

Sleep and Non-REM Sleep

## As an individual becomes drowsy and transitions into light non-REM sleep (stage N1), the EEG slows and

shows waves in the theta range (4−7 Hz) (Figure 44–1B).

12/12/20 3:25 PM

rons; the EOG shows frequent eye movements; and the EMG shows moderate and variable muscle tone. Dur ing quiet wakefulness, with eyes closed, rhythmic EEG waves in the alpha range (8–13 Hz) are common, particularly over the occipital region. For most of the sleep period, the EEG shows slower activity, but periodically during the night, there are shifts into a sleep state with a faster, lower-voltage EEG, loss of muscle tone, and rapid eye movements called rapid eye movement

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1081


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Consciousness begins to fade during stage N1, but the

individual may still be awakened by minimal stimula-

tion. Stage N2 often contains some slow EEG activity

in the theta and delta range (0.5−4 Hz) as well as sleep spindles, 10- to 16-Hz waxing and waning EEG oscillations lasting 1 to 2 seconds, typically with a gradual onset and offset so the EEG waves resemble an oldfashioned spindle tapered at both ends. The EEG also may show large, single slow waves called K-complexes (Figure 44–1B). During stage N3, the EEG shows abundant, very slow EEG delta activity. During stages N2 and N3, people are generally unconscious of the world around them as the slow cortical activity disrupts information processing. Across all stages of non-REM sleep, eye movements are absent, muscle tone is low, breathing is slow and regular, and body temperature falls. Slow EEG activity and sleep spindles arise, respectively, from cortico-cortical and cortico-thalamic electrophysiological interactions. During non-REM sleep,

the membrane potential of cortical pyramidal neurons fluctuates between Up states (when they are depolarized and fire) and Down states (when they are hyperpolarized and silent). These slow oscillations in membrane potential, which occur even in an isolated cortical slab, correlate with slow waves in the EEG. During stage N2 sleep, spindles arise from an interaction of neurons in the reticular nucleus of the thalamus and thalamocortical relay neurons. Thalamocortical neurons are generally hyperpolarized and inactive during non-REM sleep, but inhibition from the reticular thalamic neurons can result in the opening of low-threshold Ca 2+ which drive a burst of Na + spikes in the thalamocortical neurons. The thalamocortical neurons then excite and recruit more reticular neurons, initiating the next cycle of the sleep spindle. This pattern of inhibition and excitation repeats about every 100 ms, and after several cycles, the spindle activity wanes as the reticular neurons become less responsive (Figure 44–2). After about 90 minutes of sleep, people usually enter the stage known as REM sleep, a period in which dreams are often vivid and sometimes bizarre. REM

such as sphincter control. As discussed later in this

chapter, this inhibition of motor neurons is crucial as it

prevents the physical enactment of dreams.

During REM sleep, the body undergoes many additional physiological changes. Body temperature falls during non-REM sleep, and it can fall further

during REM sleep as the generation and retention of heat are minimal. Autonomic regulation is altered such that heart rate and blood pressure can vary wildly. In addition, men experience penile erections and women experience physiological signs of sexual arousal during REM sleep. Across the night, episodes of non-REM sleep alternate with REM sleep, and each of these sleep cycles takes about 90 minutes. Sleep in a healthy young adult

usually begins with a rapid descent into stage N3 nonREM sleep, followed by lighter non-REM sleep and then some REM sleep, and with each cycle, non-REM sleep becomes lighter and the periods of REM sleep become longer (Figure 44–1A). At the end of the sleep period, people often wake spontaneously from an episode of REM sleep. The Ascending Arousal System

Promotes Wakefulness

## Modern perspectives of the neural basis of sleep and wakefulness go back about 100 years to the con-

cepts derived by the neurologist and neuropatholo-

channels, gist Baron Constantin von Economo. Around World War I, he observed an unusual type of encephalitis, believed to be a viral infection of the brain that specifically attacked the sleep–wake control circuitry. In most cases, patients had "encephalitis lethargica," sleeping 20 or more hours per day. When they awoke, they were generally cogent, but they would stay awake only long enough to eat and then go right back to sleep. This intense sleepiness would persist for many months before improving. But in patients who died during this interval, von Economo found focal damage to the brain, at the junction of the midbrain and diencephalon, leading him to hypothesize that the upper brain stem and posterior hypothalamus contain critical circuitry that activates the forebrain, producing a normal wakeful state. Other patients afflicted in the same epidemic had just the opposite problem: unrelenting severe insomnia. They would be restless and, despite feeling sleepy,

sleep was discovered in 1953 when Eugene Aserinsky and Nathaniel Kleitman observed that across a night of sleep, adults have several episodes of jerky conjugate eye movements, and when awakened from this state, about three-fourths of subjects reported dreams with visual imagery. Muscle tone is extremely low during REM sleep, owing to inhibition of motor neurons by descending pathways from the brain stem. This paralysis affects

nearly all motor neurons except those that support respiration, eye movements, and a few other functions

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1082

unable to fall asleep. Eventually, they would fall into a fitful sleep for only a few hours each day, but would waken without feeling refreshed. In post mortem examinations of these patients, von Economo found

12/12/20 3:25 PM

rhythms during sleep.

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness

A

<!-- image -->

Extracellular

(multiple neurons)

<!-- image -->

A. The slow oscillation that underlies the slow waves of the

EEG during non-REM sleep is generated within the cerebral cortex by intrinsic massively recurrent excitatory and inhibitory

connections. Slow waves will continue even in an isolated corti

cal slab. Intracellular recordings from such neurons during slow oscillations show rhythmic down states when the individual neurons are hyperpolarized and do not fire, alternating with up states when the membrane potential is more depolarized and the neurons fire multiple action potentials. This synchronous firing produces waves of dendritic potentials, which appear as slow waves in the EEG. (Data from Dr. David McCormick.) B. Similarly, in a thalamic slice, recurrent circuitry generates spindle waves. A burst of spikes in reticular nucleus neurons (gray) hyperpolarizes thalamocortical relay neurons (red) sufficiently to

2+

de-inactivate low-threshold (T-type) Ca channels. As the hyperpolarization wanes, these Ca 2+ channels open and the resultant Ca 2+ current depolarizes the relay neuron, producing a brief burst of Na + channel spikes on top of a Ca 2+ channel spike plateau.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1083

20 mV

channel spikes

channel spike

20 mV

Meanwhile, as the burst in the relay cell continues, its excitatory

channel spike in the reticular neu-

ron, which drives another burst of Na

+

spikes. The resultant vol-

-ley of feedback inhibition to the relay cells initiates a new burst cycle. This firing pattern recurs 12 to 14 times per second, and the resulting waves of thalamocortical action potentials reaching the cortex produce sleep spindles in the EEG. The upper trace shows action potentials from a local population of relay cells. The lower trace shows inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and spike bursts from an individual relay cell; on this slow time base, each upstroke in the intracellular record represents a burst of up to six action potentials. As the trace shows, individual relay neurons do not reach spike threshold during every cycle of the spindle wave. As a result, the amplitude of the extracellular spike activity varies from cycle to cycle, depending on which neurons happen to fire and their distances from the extracellular electrode tip. However, each burst of thalamic firing would produce a volley of excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the cortex, resulting in an electroencephalogram wave, time-locked to the thalamic firing. (Reproduced, with permission, from Bal, von Krosigk, and McCormick 1995. Copyright © 1995 The Physiological Society.)

12/12/20 3:25 PM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

lesions in the anterior hypothalamus. He proposed

that neurons in this area are important for inhibiting

the brain stem arousal system to allow sleep. Modern

studies have shown a system of wake–sleep circuitry in the brain that is remarkably close to von Economo's model. The Ascending Arousal System in the Brain Stem and Hypothalamus Innervates the Forebrain

## The composition of the ascending arousal system has been debated since von Economo's time. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, lesion studies confirmed that

damage to the upper midbrain reticular formation could cause coma, whereas electrical stimulation of this region could arouse animals. The location and nature of the wake-promoting neurons were unknown.

In the succeeding decades, it became clear that

these lesions damaged the axons of neurons in the

upper brain stem that project to the forebrain, includ-

ing noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus, serotonergic neurons in the dorsal and median raphe, and midbrain dopaminergic neurons (Chapter 40). The axons of other neurons in the posterior hypothalamus, including those producing histamine and orexin, also join this pathway, which splits into two bundles, with some projections innervating the thalamus and others the hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and cerebral cortex (Figure 44–3). Neurons contributing to all of these ascending pathways fire fastest during the awake state but much slower during sleep, suggesting that they are

wake-promoting. However, although many monoamine antagonists cause sleepiness, and lesions of the

Ascending arousal system

Modulatory system

Laterodorsal

tegmental nucleus

Acetylcholine

Pedunculopontine

Glutamate

Acetylcholine

monoaminergic neurons in the noradrenergic locus ceruleus, the

serotonergic dorsal and median raphe nuclei, and the histaminer-

<!-- image -->

neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine tegmental

nuclei and cholinergic and GABAergic (dark gray) neurons in the basal forebrain. Lesions of either the parabrachial and pedunculopontine nuclei or the basal forebrain cause coma. Of somewhat lesser importance are dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and ventral periaqueductal gray (vPAG) matter and glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons in the supramammillary nucleus, where lesions can increase sleep by about 20%. In addition, populations of modulatory neurons can strongly promote wakefulness when stimulated, but when damaged cause minimal changes in wake–sleep amounts. These include the

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1084

gic tuberomammillary nucleus; the cholinergic neurons

in the pedunculopontine and lateral dorsal tegmental nuclei; and the orexinergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus (LH). All of these neurons send their axons through the hypothalamus and basal forebrain directly to the cerebral cortex, where their net effect is to increase cortical arousal. Many of the modulatory pathways also activate the thalamus, enabling thalamic transmission of sensory information to the cerebral cortex. GABAergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus also promote wakefulness by inhibiting neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic area and reticular nucleus of the thalamus that oppose wakefulness.

12/12/20 3:25 PM

monoaminergic cell groups impair the ability to stay

awake under adverse conditions, such lesions have lit-

tle lasting effect on the amount or timing of wake or

sleep. Lesions of the orexinergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus cause narcolepsy, a condition in which sleep–wake states are present in normal amounts but Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness Damage to the Ascending Arousal System Causes Coma

## Consciousness depends upon the activity of the cerebral hemispheres during the awake state. Hence, loss

of consciousness occurs when there is injury to the

-ascending arousal system or to both cerebral hemispheres, or there is a severe metabolic derangement (eg, low blood sugar, inadequate oxygenation, various forms of drug intoxication) that affects both the arousal system and its cortical targets. A patient who cannot be awakened, even by vigorous stimulation, is said to be in a coma. Those who can be partially awakened by such stimuli are said to be stuporous or obtunded. The clinical approach to a comatose or obtunded patient is first to determine if there is injury to the ascending arousal system. Because of the proximity of

are unstable, as discussed later. In fact, of all of the mon oaminergic cell groups that are thought to contribute to arousal, only lesions of the dopaminergic neurons near the dorsal raphe nucleus cause small but long-lasting reductions in arousal, resulting in about a 20% increase in total sleep time. Interestingly, the ability of drugs such as amphetamine or modafinil to promote wakefulness appears to depend upon their ability to block dopamine reuptake, as mice with deletions of the dopamine transporter do not respond to these drugs. Because lesions of the ascending monoaminergic and orexinergic pathways have little if any effect on the total amount of wakefulness, recent work has

emphasized the role of glutamatergic, cholinergic, and GABAergic neurons in maintaining wakefulness. Lesions of glutamatergic neurons in the dorsolateral rostral pons, including the parabrachial nucleus and adjacent pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, cause a comatose state from which the animals cannot be awakened. Lesions confined to the thalamus impair the content of consciousness but have relatively little effect on wake–sleep cycles. On the other hand, lesions of the posterior lateral hypothalamus cause profound sleepiness, which cannot be accounted for by damage to the orexinergic or histaminergic neurons in this region. Glutamatergic neurons in the supramammillary region, which activate the cortex, and GABAergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus that inhibit sleeppromoting circuits, may account for this arousal effect. Finally, large bilateral lesions of the basal forebrain also can produce coma, similar to lesions of the dorsolateral pons. Optogenetic or chemogenetic activation of cholinergic, GABAergic, or glutamatergic neurons in the basal forebrain indicates that neurons of all three types may produce arousal. Thus, the current view of the ascending arousal system is that the crucial components are glutamatergic neurons in the dorsolateral pons, supramammil-

lary hypothalamus, and basal forebrain; cholinergic neurons in the dorsolateral pons and basal forebrain; and GABAergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus and basal forebrain. These are likely to be augmented by modulatory pathways containing orexin and monoamines, needed to allow full and sustained wakefulness particularly under adverse conditions (Figure 44–3).

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1085

the arousal pathways to those that control eye movement and pupillary responses, as well as respiration and some motor responses (Chapter 40), clinicians examine these brain stem functions carefully. If these functions are intact, it is likely that the problem is due to a metabolic condition, which can be assessed by various blood and spinal fluid tests. In addition, a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the brain is needed to look for pathology affecting both cerebral hemispheres (eg, a large tumor or blood clot). Circuits Composed of Mutually Inhibitory Neurons

Control Transitions From Wake to Sleep and From

Non-REM to REM Sleep

## In contrast to coma, sleep is a temporary, reversible loss of consciousness produced by specific brain circuitry that inhibits the ascending arousal system. Neurons in

the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus contain the inhibitory neurotransmitters GABA and galanin and project extensively to most parts of the ascending arousal system. These preoptic neurons fire slowest during wakefulness, increase their firing as animals fall asleep, and fire fastest during deep sleep after a period of sleep deprivation. Similarly, GABAergic neurons in the nearby median preoptic nucleus also promote sleep and project to some components of the arousal system. Lesions

of these preoptic neurons result in fragmented sleep and cause animals to lose as much as half of their total sleep. Of clinical relevance, elderly people often have fragmented sleep, and those with the most fragmented sleep show the greatest loss of the sleep-promoting ventrolateral preoptic galanin neurons in postmortem examination. In addition, a population of GABAergic neurons in the parafacial zone, a region near the facial

12/12/20 3:25 PM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

nerve as it courses through the brain stem, inhibits the

parabrachial nucleus. Lesions of the parafacial zone

also result in loss of up to half of total sleep time.

Interestingly, the ventrolateral preoptic neurons receive inhibitory inputs from neurons throughout the arousal system. Mutually inhibitory connections

between the ventrolateral preoptic neurons and the arousal system result in a neural circuit with properties similar to an electrical flip-flop switch, in which each side of the circuit turns the other off. Such a cir cuit produces rapid and full transitions between two states. Although it may sometimes appear that it takes a long time to fall asleep, the actual transitions from wake to sleep, or vice versa, are generally quick, taking only a few seconds to a few minutes. In fact, most animals spend nearly their entire day clearly awake or asleep, with very little time spent in transitions. These rapid transitions are behaviorally adaptive as an animal would be vulnerable in an intermediate, drowsy state. A neural flip-flop switch prevents this situation because when either side of the switch gains advantage over the other, the circuit produces a rapid and complete transition in state (Figure 44–4). REM sleep is generated by a network of brain stem neurons centered in the pons. The fast EEG rhythms and dream activity of REM sleep are thought to be

driven by coordinated activity of glutamatergic neurons in the subceruleus region (ventral to the locus ceruleus in the pons) plus cholinergic and glutamatergic neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus that innervate the basal forebrain and thalamus. Other glutamatergic subceruleus neurons produce the paralysis of REM sleep via projections to the ventromedial medulla and spinal cord, where they activate GABAergic and glycinergic neurons that deeply hyperpolarize motor neurons. The subceruleus area in turn receives input from a population of GABAergic neurons in and just lateral to the periaqueductal gray matter, where the cerebral

aqueduct opens into the fourth ventricle. These neurons are most active during wake and non-REM sleep, and they inhibit the subceruleus neurons, preventing entry into REM sleep. Conversely, GABAergic neurons in the subceruleus area also project back to the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray region. The mutual inhibition between the two populations of neurons may form another flip-flop switch that promotes rapid and complete transitions into and out of REM sleep. Interestingly, the noradrenergic locus ceruleus and serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus innervate and inhibit the subceruleus region. Thus, REM sleep is

often reduced when people take antidepressants that increase brain levels of serotonin or norepinephrine.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1086

In addition, as these monoaminergic neurons are

active during wakefulness, they prevent direct transi-

tions from wake into REM sleep (Figure 44–5).

Sleep Is Regulated by Homeostatic and

Circadian Drives

## -The circadian regulation of sleep obeys a 24-hour biological clock (described later), whereas the homeo-

static drive for sleep gradually accumulates during

the awake state. After a period of sleep deprivation, much of the lost sleep is recovered over the next few nights, which in younger people may involve deeper and longer periods of stage N3 non-REM sleep. REM sleep is also recovered after REM deprivation; rebound REM sleep can include especially intense dreams, long periods of REM sleep, and occasional

breakthrough of REM sleep phenomena into wakefulness, such as dream-like hallucinations or brief paralysis when falling asleep or waking up. Rebound sleep on a weekend is commonly enriched in REM sleep in people who wake up early to an alarm clock on workdays and miss out on the last portion of sleep, which is mainly REM sleep. The Homeostatic Pressure for Sleep Depends on Humoral Factors

## Humoral factors circulating in the brain signal the homeostatic pressure for non-REM sleep. The brain

is metabolically quite active during wakefulness and

uses ATP, but with sustained periods of wakefulness, ATP is dephosphorylated to adenosine, which acts as a local neuromodulator in the extracellular envi -ronment. Adenosine type 1 receptors are inhibitory receptors that are expressed on wake-promoting neurons and in many other parts of the brain, so higher adenosine levels may produce sleepiness by inhibiting these neurons. In addition, adenosine can excite neurons via adenosine type 2a receptors; these receptors are common in the shell of the nucleus accumbens and may cause sleepiness by means of projections to the hypothalamus that activate the ventrolateral preoptic neurons. The pressure for sleep can be measured by the time it takes an individual to fall asleep if given the opportunity in a comfortable environment. This approach is

used by sleep clinicians in the Multiple Sleep Latency Test, in which an individual is given 20-minute intervals to try to fall asleep in a comfortable, quiet bed every 2 hours beginning at 9 am, for five sleep opportunities. An individual who is well rested generally

12/12/20 3:25 PM

A

Figure 44–4 Sleep-promoting pathways.

44–3) receive inhibitory, largely GABAergic inputs from sleep- Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness Sleep-promoting system Arousal cell groups Modulatory cell groups Laterodorsal tegmental nucleus Acetylcholine Pedunculopontine

(see Figure 44–5). (Abbreviations: vPAG, ventral periaqueductal

B. The flip-flop switch relationship of the ventrolateral and

promoting neurons. Neurons in the ventrolateral and median

<!-- image -->

preoptic nuclei (VLPO, MNPO) innervate the entire arousalpromoting system, while those in the parafacial zone (PFZ) innervate mainly the parabrachial area. Many of the VLPO neurons also contain galanin (GAL), an inhibitory peptide. Neurons in the lateral hypothalamus (LH) that release melaninconcentrating hormone (MCH) may promote REM sleep by inhibiting both nearby orexinergic neurons as well as neurons in the periaqueductal gray matter that prevent REM sleep

takes at least 15 to 20 minutes to fall asleep, but a very

sleepy person can easily fall asleep within a few

minutes in each nap. Another test of sleep pressure is

the Psychomotor Vigilance Task. The subject is told to watch a small lamp and press a button as soon as they see the light turned on. The light then turns on at random times over a 5- to 10-minute test period; sleepy subjects are inattentive and intermittently are slow or completely fail to respond to the light stimulus.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1087

median preoptic nuclei and the mutually inhibitory components of the ascending arousal system (LC, locus ceruleus; A1 ,

noradrenergic neurons; DR, dorsal raphe; TMN, tuberomammillary nucleus; PB, parabrachial nucleus). When activated, the sleep-promoting neurons inhibit the components of the ascending arousal system. However, the sleep-promoting cell groups are also inhibited by the arousal system. The net effect is that the individual spends most time fully awake or asleep while minimizing time in transitional states.

Circadian Rhythms Are Controlled by a Biological

Clock in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus

## Circadian rhythms are roughly 24-hour physiological rhythms that synchronize the internal state of an ani-

mal with the external daily environment and anticipate

various physiologic demands that occur on a daily basis. In humans, circadian wake-promoting signals during the day counterbalance the rising homeostatic

12/12/20 3:25 PM



Figure 44–5 The REM sleep switch. Brain stem neurons are

essential for controlling the transitions between non–rapid eye

movement (REM) and REM sleep. REM sleep is generated by

Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

a population of neurons in the rostral pons, just ventral to the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus and locus ceruleus, in what is called the sublaterodorsal area in rodents and the subceruleus region in humans. These glutamatergic neurons project to other parts of the brain stem, where they initiate the motor and autonomic manifestations of REM sleep, and to the forebrain, where they mediate behavioral and electroencephalographic components of REM sleep. The descending projection activates inhibitory interneurons in the medulla and spinal cord that profoundly hyperpolarize motor neurons and prevent the individual from acting out his or her dreams. These REM-on neurons are inhibited by GABAergic neurons in the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray matter and adjacent pontine reticular formation, while the latter are themselves inhibited by neurons in the REM-on region, thus forming a flip-flop switch (see

<!-- image -->

sleep pressure. The circadian wake-promoting signal

dips slightly in the mid-afternoon, when many peo-

ple take a nap or siesta. Around the habitual bedtime,

this circadian waking influence rapidly collapses, the homeostatic drive for sleep is unopposed, and sleep ensues. In the hour or two before the customary waking time, circadian promotion of sleep occurs to ensure an adequate amount of sleep, since homeostatic sleep pressure is low late in the sleep period (Figure 44–6A). Circadian rhythms are driven by a small group of GABAergic neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus located in the hypothalamus just above the optic chi-

asm. The 24-hour rhythm of activity in this biological

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1088

Laterodorsal

tegmental nucleus

Pedunculopontine

Acetylcholine

Locus ceruleus

Norepinephrine

Dorsal raphe nucleus

Figure 44–4B). These REM-off neurons are under the control

of forebrain neurons, including neurons that release the excita-

tory orexin neuropeptides, neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic

nucleus (VLPO) that release the inhibitory signaling molecules γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and galanin, and hypothalamic neurons that release the inhibitory neuropeptide melaninconcentrating hormone (MCH). In addition, modulatory neurons in the locus ceruleus and dorsal raphe inhibit the REM generator, whereas cholinergic neurons in the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei promote REM sleep. This model explains many clinical observations, such as the fact that cholinergic agonist drugs promote REM sleep, whereas drugs such as antidepressants that increase monoamine levels suppress REM sleep. Loss of orexinergic neurons can cause abrupt onset of REM sleep, whereas loss of REM-on neurons in the sublaterodorsal area abolishes atonia during REM sleep. Thus, individuals with this condition act out their dreams (REM sleep behavior disorder).

clock is driven by a set of "clock genes," which undergo

a transcriptional-translational cycle with an approxi-

mately 24-hour period. The positive limb of the loop

consists of two proteins, BMAL1 and CLOCK, which dimerize and form a transcription factor that binds to the E-box motif, which is found in the promoter region of hundreds of genes that undergo daily cycles in their expression. Among those genes whose expression is increased by BMAL1 and CLOCK are the Period and Cryptochrome genes. Their protein products also dimerize, form a complex with casein kinase 1 delta or epsilon, and are translocated to the nucleus of the cell, where they cause BMAL1 and CLOCK to dissociate

12/12/20 3:25 PM

Figure 44–6 The circadian drive for wakefulness

interacts with the homeostatic drive for sleep to

shape wake–sleep cycles.

A. Sleep drive builds up gradually over the course of a long period of wakefulness, whereas the circadian drive for wakefulness varies on a 24-hour cycle, regardless

of previous sleep. The peak of this circadian wake cycle occurs in the hours before bed, as the homeostatic sleep drive is rising, whereas the low point occurs in the hours just before the habitual time of awakening, when the homeostatic drive for sleep is ebbing. B. The 24-hour rhythm in mammalian cells is regulated by a set of proteins that form a transcriptional-translational loop. BMAL1 and CLOCK form a dimer that binds to the

E-box motif found on many genes that have circadian rhythms of transcription. Among these are the Period 1 and 2 genes (Per1, Per2) and the Cryptochrome 1 and 2 genes (Cry1, Cry2). Their products dimerize and form a complex with casein-1 kinase epsilon or delta (CK1E/D). The complex translocates to the nucleus, where it inhibits the dimerization of BMAL1 and CLOCK, causing it to fall off the E-box. This reduces the transcription of Period and Cryptochrome genes; as PER and CRY proteins are degraded, BMAL1 and CLOCK dimerize once more, and the cycle repeats. C. Circadian rhythms regulate the timing of sleep and wake. The plot shows the wake cycles (yellow bars) of an individual who initially lives under regular lighting

conditions for 3 days and then lives in a dimly lit environment with no time cues for 18 days. The individual maintains daily cycles of about 25.2 hours, drifting an entire day over this period. Blind people who cannot relay light signals to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (see Figure 44–7) often live continuously like this, a condition called non– 24-hour wake–sleep disorder.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1089

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness

A Wake–sleep cycle with light cues

Sleep drive

<!-- image -->

Cytoplasm Night

P

24 8

P

<!-- image -->



Day Without time cues

<!-- image -->


8 8 16 24

12/12/20 3:25 PM



Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

from the E-box, reducing transcription of many genes,

including themselves. This results in a fall in Period and

Cryptochrome proteins until BMAL1 and CLOCK can

once more dimerize, restarting the cycle. In addition to this core loop, additional genetic side loops modulate the period of the circadian clock (Figure 44–6B). This daily gene cycle functions in almost all cells in the body, including those in the brain, and it is essential for driving a wide range of circadian rhythms,

from secretion of hormones and digestive enzymes to readying the liver for metabolic processing of food and the cardiovascular system for the active period of the day. When removed from the body and placed in a culture dish, most cells in the body rapidly fall out of synchrony, as the individual cellular clock cycles vary between cells by as much as an hour or two from the 24-hour mean. However, when neurons of the suprachiasmatic nucleus are cultured they continue to communicate with one another and thereby synchronize their cellular rhythms. This coordinated activity by suprachiasmatic neurons results in a close to 24-hour rhythm; the average period in humans who are placed in a continuous dim light environment is 24.1 hours, resulting in a slow drift in circadian rhythms (Figure 44–6C). The suprachiasmatic nucleus exerts control over all of the other body clocks by regulating body temperature as well as autonomic, endocrine, and behavioral

functions. Interestingly, although the daily rhythm in body temperature can adjust the timing of rhythms in many organs, the rhythm of the suprachiasmatic nucleus itself is highly resistant to changes in temperature, so its fundamental pacemaking is unaltered. In the end, the circadian timing of the brain and body runs on suprachiasmatic time. Still, the suprachiasmatic clock must be entrained to the external world. If it were not, each person with a 24.1-hour cycle would progressively wake up six min-

utes later each day than the day before and would be unable to adjust to seasonal variations in sunrise and sunset. To avoid this situation, the suprachiasmatic nucleus receives direct inputs from a special class of retinal ganglion cells that signal light levels, rather than participating in image formation. Like all retinal ganglion cells, these neurons receive inputs from rods and cones, but they also contain melanopsin, a photopigment that makes them intrinsically photosensitive and hence they function as luminance detectors. In addition to entraining internal circadian rhythms to the ambient light cycle, these cells also regulate other non–image-forming visual functions such as the pupillary light reflex and the feeling of pain that can occur when one looks into bright lights.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1090

Some individuals have unusually short circadian

periods due to mutations in clock genes or their regu-

latory elements. For example, individuals with familial

advanced sleep-phase syndrome prefer to go to bed early in the evening and cannot sleep past 3 or 4 am. In families with this disorder, mutations in the genes coding for Period or Casein kinase-1 delta result in more rapid cycling of the clock. Blind people in whom the melanopsin-containing neurons are damaged lack visual input to their suprachiasmatic nucleus, often resulting in non–24-hour

sleep–wake rhythm disorder. Because most people have an intrinsic cycle longer than 24 hours, circadian rhythms in these individuals drift, becoming a few minutes later each day, so that most of the time they are out of synch with the rest of the world. They lack the ability to entrain to external light–dark conditions because the suprachiasmatic nucleus lacks the crucial resetting signal from the retina. This problem is most common in people who have lost their eyes (eg, due to trauma or infection), but it is not seen in blind people in whom the melanopsin-containing neurons are intact (eg, blindness due to degeneration of rods and cones, or problems with the cornea or lens) and who also retain their pupillary light reflexes. In contrast to light, which is signaled by the melanopsin neurons, the hormone melatonin signals darkness. Melatonin is made by the pineal gland, and

the suprachiasmatic neurons time its release through communication with neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus that activate sympathetic innervation of the pineal gland. Neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus contain melatonin receptors, which reinforce circadian rhythms. Similarly, exogenous melatonin or melatonin agonists can entrain circadian rhythms, promoting sleep by regularizing sleep onset. This treatment approach is particularly useful in entraining circadian rhythms in individuals with non– 24-hour sleep–wake rhythm disorder. Circadian Control of Sleep Depends on Hypothalamic Relays

## The suprachiasmatic nucleus is most active during the daily light period in all mammalian species. While

humans are diurnal (awake during the day and asleep

during the night), nocturnal mammals have the opposite activity cycle. How can such opposite behavioral patterns be set by the suprachiasmatic nucleus if it is most active during the light period? The answer appears to lie in a series of relays interposed between the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the wake–sleep control circuitry, which give the circadian

12/12/20 3:25 PM
Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

from the E-box, reducing transcription of many genes,

including themselves. This results in a fall in Period and

Cryptochrome proteins until BMAL1 and CLOCK can

once more dimerize, restarting the cycle. In addition to this core loop, additional genetic side loops modulate the period of the circadian clock (Figure 44–6B). This daily gene cycle functions in almost all cells in the body, including those in the brain, and it is essential for driving a wide range of circadian rhythms,

from secretion of hormones and digestive enzymes to readying the liver for metabolic processing of food and the cardiovascular system for the active period of the day. When removed from the body and placed in a culture dish, most cells in the body rapidly fall out of synchrony, as the individual cellular clock cycles vary between cells by as much as an hour or two from the 24-hour mean. However, when neurons of the suprachiasmatic nucleus are cultured they continue to communicate with one another and thereby synchronize their cellular rhythms. This coordinated activity by suprachiasmatic neurons results in a close to 24-hour rhythm; the average period in humans who are placed in a continuous dim light environment is 24.1 hours, resulting in a slow drift in circadian rhythms (Figure 44–6C). The suprachiasmatic nucleus exerts control over all of the other body clocks by regulating body temperature as well as autonomic, endocrine, and behavioral

functions. Interestingly, although the daily rhythm in body temperature can adjust the timing of rhythms in many organs, the rhythm of the suprachiasmatic nucleus itself is highly resistant to changes in temperature, so its fundamental pacemaking is unaltered. In the end, the circadian timing of the brain and body runs on suprachiasmatic time. Still, the suprachiasmatic clock must be entrained to the external world. If it were not, each person with a 24.1-hour cycle would progressively wake up six min-

utes later each day than the day before and would be unable to adjust to seasonal variations in sunrise and sunset. To avoid this situation, the suprachiasmatic nucleus receives direct inputs from a special class of retinal ganglion cells that signal light levels, rather than participating in image formation. Like all retinal ganglion cells, these neurons receive inputs from rods and cones, but they also contain melanopsin, a photopigment that makes them intrinsically photosensitive and hence they function as luminance detectors. In addition to entraining internal circadian rhythms to the ambient light cycle, these cells also regulate other non–image-forming visual functions such as the pupillary light reflex and the feeling of pain that can occur when one looks into bright lights.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1090

Some individuals have unusually short circadian

periods due to mutations in clock genes or their regu-

latory elements. For example, individuals with familial

advanced sleep-phase syndrome prefer to go to bed early in the evening and cannot sleep past 3 or 4 am. In families with this disorder, mutations in the genes coding for Period or Casein kinase-1 delta result in more rapid cycling of the clock. Blind people in whom the melanopsin-containing neurons are damaged lack visual input to their suprachiasmatic nucleus, often resulting in non–24-hour

sleep–wake rhythm disorder. Because most people have an intrinsic cycle longer than 24 hours, circadian rhythms in these individuals drift, becoming a few minutes later each day, so that most of the time they are out of synch with the rest of the world. They lack the ability to entrain to external light–dark conditions because the suprachiasmatic nucleus lacks the crucial resetting signal from the retina. This problem is most common in people who have lost their eyes (eg, due to trauma or infection), but it is not seen in blind people in whom the melanopsin-containing neurons are intact (eg, blindness due to degeneration of rods and cones, or problems with the cornea or lens) and who also retain their pupillary light reflexes. In contrast to light, which is signaled by the melanopsin neurons, the hormone melatonin signals darkness. Melatonin is made by the pineal gland, and

the suprachiasmatic neurons time its release through communication with neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus that activate sympathetic innervation of the pineal gland. Neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus contain melatonin receptors, which reinforce circadian rhythms. Similarly, exogenous melatonin or melatonin agonists can entrain circadian rhythms, promoting sleep by regularizing sleep onset. This treatment approach is particularly useful in entraining circadian rhythms in individuals with non– 24-hour sleep–wake rhythm disorder. Circadian Control of Sleep Depends on Hypothalamic Relays

## The suprachiasmatic nucleus is most active during the daily light period in all mammalian species. While

humans are diurnal (awake during the day and asleep

during the night), nocturnal mammals have the opposite activity cycle. How can such opposite behavioral patterns be set by the suprachiasmatic nucleus if it is most active during the light period? The answer appears to lie in a series of relays interposed between the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the wake–sleep control circuitry, which give the circadian

12/12/20 3:25 PM

timing system flexibility in meeting the needs of the

individual. The suprachiasmatic neurons are GABAergic,

and they send the bulk of their output to an adjacent

region called the subparaventricular zone. This area in the anterior hypothalamus contains mostly GABAergic neurons that fire in antiphase to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, ie, are most active at night. The targets of the subparaventricular zone largely overlap those of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, including parts of the paraventricular, dorsomedial, ventromedial, and lateral hypothalamus that regulate various physiological and behavioral systems. Presumably, then, the timing of a particular physiological or behavioral function would depend upon the relationships of these two antiphase circadian inputs to their target neurons. One crucial target of the subparaventricular zone is the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, which regulates a number of circadian behaviors, includ-

ing the wake–sleep cycle. Lesions of the dorsomedial nucleus severely disrupt circadian rhythms of sleep, feeding, locomotor activity, and corticosteroid secretion. The dorsomedial nucleus is thought to promote wakefulness via GABAergic projections to the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus and glutamatergic projections to the lateral hypothalamus (Figure 44–7). Sleep Loss Impairs Cognition and Memory

When people are sleepy, they often have impaired vigi-

## lance, working memory, judgement, and insight. Some of the attentional problems may be caused by microsleeps

brief periods of slower cortical activity. For example, subjects who rarely miss stimuli on the Psychomotor Vigilance Task when well rested may miss over 20% of the visual stimuli when sleepy. In addition to these global lapses in cortical function, sleepiness can also produce local sleep with slow EEG waves in focal cortical areas. Executive function is often the first thing to fail with sleepiness, and sleep-deprived people show reduced metabolism and focal slowing in the frontal cortex in EEGs. While sleepiness impairs cognition, sleep itself helps consolidate memories. When subjects are taught a simple motor task, such as pressing buttons in a

<!-- image -->

predetermined sequence, they become more efficient with practice. Robert Stickgold and colleagues found that if the training is in the morning, and the subjects are tested 12 hours later in the evening (without intervening sleep), they perform at about the same level as when they stopped their training. However, if they are tested the next morning after a night of sleep, they usually perform better than on the day of training. Subjects who are trained in the evening still perform better 12 hours later if they have had a chance to sleep

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1091

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness


Glutamate

GABA

light activate the suprachiasmatic nucleus (upper figure)

,

which then drives the wake–sleep cycle through a series of relays in the hypothalamus (lower figure). The sagittal section through the hypothalamus shows the suprachiasmatic nucleus projecting to neurons in the ventral subparaventricular zone (vSPZ), which in turn project to the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (DMH). The DMH contains glutamatergic neurons that excite orexinergic and glutamatergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), causing wakefulness. GABAergic neurons in the DMH inhibit the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus (VLPO), turning off the sleep-promoting system. Animals with DMH lesions fail to show circadian rhythms of wake–sleep and sleep about an hour more per day. overnight but not if they remained awake. Improve-

ment of certain types of memory consolidation (eg,

memory for a visual perception task) is correlated with

the amount of REM sleep, while other types (eg, memory for a finger-tapping sequence task) correlate with stage N2 non-REM sleep.

12/12/20 3:25 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

These studies suggest that in each stage of sleep

the cerebral cortex undergoes synaptic reorganiza-

tion to consolidate the memory of specific types of

salient information. Conversely, this memory consolidation is lost when subjects are deprived of sleep or have fragmented sleep. A related theory, proposed by Giulio Tononi and Chiara Cirelli, is that rebalancing of synaptic strengths based on recent experience (synaptic homeostasis) occurs during sleep. The size of many excitatory synapses is increased during learning, requiring that some excitatory inputs be reduced to avoid overexciting the target neuron. Tononi and Cirelli found that the size of smaller synapses in motor and sensory cortex is reduced during sleep, resulting in strong inputs being strengthened while competing weaker ones are removed. Diseases that cause sleep loss or that wake people from sleep can impair cognition. For example, obstructive sleep apnea can severely fragment sleep, resulting in

daytime sleepiness, inattention, and other cognitive impairments. Fragmented sleep is also common in Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer patients tend to have fewer neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, and the extent of neuronal loss correlates with their degree of sleep fragmentation. Whether treating sleep fragmentation can improve cognition in Alzheimer patients remains to be determined. Sleep Changes With Age

Sleep changes with age in striking and characteristic

## ways. As every new parent quickly learns, the lengthy

sleep time of a newborn is distributed almost ran-

domly throughout the day. Although the EEG rhythms in newborns are not as well formed as those of older children or adults, more than 50% (8–9 hours per day) of that sleep is spent in a state much like REM sleep. Sleep recordings from a premature infant exhibit an even higher percentage of REM-like sleep, indicating that in utero the fetus spends a large fraction of

the day in a brain-activated but movement-inhibited state. As neuronal activity influences the development of functional circuits in the brain (Chapters 48 and 49), it is reasonable to think that the spontaneous activity of the immature brain during sleep facilitates the development of neural circuits. By approximately 4 months of age, the average baby begins to show diurnal rhythms that are synchronized with day and night, much to the relief of weary

parents. The total duration of sleep gradually declines, and by 5 years of age, the child may sleep 11 hours each night plus a nap, and 10 hours of sleep is typical

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1092

around age 10. At these early ages, sleep is deep; stage

N3 is prominent, with an abundance of delta waves in

the EEG. As a result, children are not easily wakened

by environmental stimuli. With age, sleep becomes lighter and more fragmented. The percentage of time spent in stage N3 sleep drops across adulthood, and by the age of 50 to

60, it is not unusual for N3 to fade entirely, especially in men. This shift toward lighter stages of non-REM sleep results in two to three times as many spontaneous awakenings and more easily disrupted sleep. Many sleep disorders, including insomnia and sleep apnea, become more prevalent with age, and insomnia is common, often due to waking in response to neural signals to empty the bladder or due to discomfort from menopausal symptoms or from arthritis and other diseases. Why this change occurs with age is unclear; homeostatic sleep pressure appears normal, but the neural mechanisms for producing deep non-REM sleep may be less effective. Disruptions in Sleep Circuitry Contribute to

Many Sleep Disorders

## Insomnia May Be Caused by Incomplete Inhibition of the Arousal System

## Insomnia is one of the most common problems in all of medicine, yet the underlying neurobiology remains a mystery. Insomnia is defined as difficulty falling

asleep or trouble staying asleep, so that function the next day is impaired. Positron emission tomography studies in patients with chronic insomnia demonstrate unusual activation of brain arousal systems during sleep, and the EEG often shows persistence of highfrequency activity (15–30 Hz) that is usually seen only during wake. In addition, rats exposed to acute stress show high-frequency EEG activity during sleep, as well as simultaneous activity in neurons of the ventrolateral

preoptic nucleus and components of the arousal system, such as the locus ceruleus and histamine neurons. This simultaneous activation can produce a unique state in which the EEG shows slow waves consistent with sleep along with high-frequency activity consistent with the awake state; this may explain why some patients appear asleep on the polysomnogram recording but they may feel awake. Clinically, insomnia is often treated with cognitive behavioral therapy that is aimed at reducing the hyperarousal and improving sleep habits. Some

patients may be treated with benzodiazepines and

12/12/20 3:25 PM

related drugs that potentiate GABA transmission and,

therefore, may help reduce activity in arousal-promoting

brain regions. Other patients derive benefit from drugs

that block the arousal system more directly, such as antihistamines. Sleep Apnea Fragments Sleep and Impairs Cognition

Sleep apnea is one of the most common sleep dis-

## orders, affecting about 5% of adults and children. Patients with obstructive sleep apnea have repeated epi-

sodes of airway obstruction that force the individual to briefly awaken from sleep to resume breathing. During sleep, muscle tone falls, and in people with small airways, relaxation of airway dilator muscles such as the genioglossus (which normally acts to pull the tongue forward) results in collapse of the airway. This causes a brief period of no air flow, and consequently, blood levels of carbon dioxide rise while oxygen levels fall, activating chemosensory systems in the medulla that increase respiratory effort. These chemosensory systems also activate neurons in the parabrachial nucleus that promote awakening, which results in a further increase in muscle tone

that reopens the airway. These airway obstructions can Stage N2

EEG

<!-- image -->

snoring is detected, but nasal airflow is good and oxygen

saturation is normal. The individual then experiences an obstructive apnea with no nasal airflow; nevertheless, respiratory effort persists (shown by the abdominal movement). The apnea is terminated by a brief awakening (low-voltage

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1093

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness


occur hundreds of times per night, but the arousals are

usually so brief that the individual may not remem-

ber them in the morning. Many people with obstruc-

tive sleep apnea do not feel rested in the morning; they feel sleepy all day and they have difficulty with a wide variety of cognitive tasks, especially those that require vigilance or learning. Clinicians often treat sleep apnea with a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device that delivers mildly pressurized air via the nose to inflate and open the air-

way during sleep. Sleep apnea can also be treated with upper airway surgery to remove obstructions such as large tonsils, a dental device to move the tongue forward, or weight loss to reduce adipose tissue in the neck. Treated patients often feel more alert and have better cognitive function, although there may be some residual cognitive impairment, possibly due to neuronal injury from repeated episodes of low oxygen saturation or hypoxia (Figure 44–8). Narcolepsy Is Caused by a Loss of Orexinergic Neurons

## Narcolepsy was first described in the late 1800s, but the underlying cause, a deficiency in a single

Arousal Stage N2

respiratory effort, and opening of the airway. Oxygen satura-

tion drops by about 3%, reaching its nadir about 15 seconds after the apnea finishes, as it takes time for blood to get from the lungs to the fingertip where oxygen saturation is measured.

12/12/20 3:26 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

neurotransmitter, has become clear only in the last two

decades. Narcolepsy typically begins in the teen years

as moderate to severe sleepiness every day, even with

ample amounts of sleep at night. People with narcolepsy can easily fall asleep in class, while driving, or during other activities when sleep might be embarrassing or dangerous. Unlike sleep apnea, their sleep is restorative, and they often feel much more alert after a 15- to 20-minute nap. In addition, in people with narcolepsy, elements of REM sleep often occur during wakefulness. For example, at night, while falling asleep or waking up, an

individual with narcolepsy might find himself unable to move (sleep paralysis) or may have vivid dream-like hallucinations (hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations) superimposed on wakefulness. Even more mysteriously, during the day, when surprised with a good joke or by unexpectedly seeing a friend, a person with narcolepsy can develop cataplexy, emotionally triggered muscle weakness that is similar to the paralysis of REM sleep. Mild cataplexy can cause weakness of the face and neck, but when severe, the individual can lose all muscle control, collapse to the ground, and be unable to move for 1 to 2 minutes. Narcolepsy remained mysterious until the late 1990s when a new family of peptide neurotransmitters,

Control

Internal

capsule

Figure 44–9 Narcolepsy is associated with a loss of hypo-

thalamic neurons that produce the orexin neuropeptides. A

dramatic loss of orexinergic neurons (green dots) is evident in orexins (also known as hypocretins), was discovered.

There are two orexin peptides, derived from the same

mRNA precursor, and they are found only in cells in

the posterior lateral hypothalamus. It was soon found that loss of orexin signaling in animals or humans could reproduce the entire narcolepsy phenotype. People with narcolepsy show a highly selective loss of more than 90% of their orexin neurons, while other types of hypothalamic neurons are spared. This cell loss is probably due to an autoimmune attack as it is linked to genes that affect immune function and has been triggered by seasonal influenza epidemics and use of a certain influenza vaccine. Recently, researchers discovered that people with narcolepsy have immune cells (T lymphocytes) that target the orexin neuropeptides (Figure 44–9). Orexinergic neurons promote wakefulness and suppress REM sleep, in part by activating monoaminergic neurons in the locus ceruleus and dorsal raphe as

Narcolepsy well as REM-off GABAergic neurons in the periaqueductal gray matter, all of which inhibit the REM sleep generating neurons in the pons. Thus, people and animals with loss of orexinergic neurons have great difficulty remaining awake for long periods, and REM sleep is disinhibited, such that REM sleep (or components of REM sleep, such as motor atonia during

Internal

capsule

these drawings of sections through the brain at the level of the

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1094

3rd

ventricle

mammillary bodies in an individual with narcolepsy (right) com-

pared to a normal brain (left). (Reproduced, with permission,

from Crocker et al. 2005. Copyright © 2005 American Academy

of Neurology.)

12/12/20 3:26 PM

wakefulness, or cataplexy) breaks through at inappro-

priate times during the day.

In terms of sleep circuitry, loss of orexinergic neu-

rons can be considered to destabilize both the wake– sleep and the REM/non-REM switches in the brain.

Thus, patients with narcolepsy can easily doze off during the day but also spontaneously wake from sleep more frequently at night. The dysregulation of REM sleep is also apparent on the Multiple Sleep Latency Test; healthy individuals almost never experience REM sleep during the day as it is under tight circadian control, but patients with narcolepsy often experience REM sleep during daytime naps. The absence of orexin signaling also explains the mysterious symptom of cataplexy. Evidence from mice lacking orexins suggests that pleasant experiences turn

on neurons in the prefrontal cortex and amygdala that can activate the brain stem pathways that trigger REM sleep paralysis. This influence is normally opposed by the orexin system, so that one may feel slightly "weak with laughter." When orexin signaling is absent, fullblown paralysis can occur. Narcolepsy is treated with medications and behavioral approaches. Sleepiness can be substantially attenuated with wake-promoting medications such

as amphetamine and modafinil. One to two strategically timed naps during the day are often helpful and can improve alertness for a couple of hours. Cataplexy often responds well to antidepressants such as serotonin or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, as these drugs strongly suppress REM sleep. Sodium oxybate taken during the night enhances deep sleep, and through an unknown mechanism, it helps consolidate wakefulness and reduce cataplexy during the day. REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Is Caused by Failure of REM Sleep Paralysis Circuits

## REM sleep behavior disorder—the loss of paralysis during REM sleep in some older adults—is the direct opposite of cataplexy. The lack of paralytic inhibition

permits the patients to act out their dreams. The individual often calls out and may grab or violently punch or kick; injuries from hitting nearby furniture or the bed partner are not unusual. These dramatic movements typically awaken the patient, who can then recall a dream about fighting off an attacker in a way that closely matches the actual movements. REM sleep behavior disorder was first identified in 1986 by Mahowald and Schenck. Ten years later, they reported that 40% of their original cohort

of 19 patients had developed Parkinson disease or a related neurodegenerative disorder with deposition of

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1095

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness


alpha-synuclein, such as Lewy body dementia or mul-

tiple system atrophy. Subsequent studies have shown

that about half of patients with REM sleep behavior

disorder develop a synucleinopathy by 12 to 14 years after onset, and nearly all by 25 years. It is now thought that the synucleinopathy begins in the brain stem and early on damages the subceruleus neurons that normally drive REM sleep paralysis. If this relationship is confirmed, the diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disorder may identify individuals with nascent synucleinopathies who could be treated with drugs, not yet developed, that slow the neurodegeneration. Restless Legs Syndrome and Periodic Limb Movement Disorder Disrupt Sleep

## Restless legs syndrome occurs in about 10% of the population and is characterized by an irresistible urge to

move the legs, usually accompanied by an annoying

internal discomfort like "ants in the pants." This restless sensation typically occurs in the evening and first half of the night and often makes it hard to fall asleep. The sensation is much worse with rest and improves by moving the legs in bed or walking about. Many people suffering from restless legs syndrome also experience periodic limb movement disorder, in which the legs and sometimes arms flex in a stereotyped way

every 20 to 40 seconds during non-REM sleep. These leg movements fragment sleep and can produce daytime sleepiness. Iron deficiency is a common cause of restless legs, and treatment with iron can be very helpful. Genome-wide association studies have found genes common to both conditions, but the underlying pathophysiology is not yet understood. Patients with both disorders often improve with low doses of a D 2 dopamine agonist, the antiepileptic drug pregabalin, or an opiate drug. Non-REM Parasomnias Include Sleepwalking, Sleep Talking, and Night Terrors

## Parasomnias are unusual behaviors that occur during either REM or non-REM sleep. Non-REM parasomnias are common in children and include sleepwalking,

sleep talking, confusional arousals, bed-wetting, and night terrors. About 15% of young adolescents have some sleepwalking, but this usually fades over time, so only about 1% of adults regularly sleepwalk. The non-REM parasomnias typically begin with a sudden arousal from stage N3 sleep, which can occur spontaneously or be triggered by a noise or airway

obstruction from sleep apnea. These are not full arousals, as for the first minute or two, the EEG still shows

12/12/20 3:26 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

the slow EEG delta waves typical of stage N3 sleep

even as the child walks, dresses, or eats. Over time,

the EEG changes to the pattern typical of wakefulness

and eventually the individual wakes up. Sleepwalkers or talkers often have no memory of these events, so that reports from the family are necessary to make the diagnosis. Bed-wetting (enuresis) may also occur during deep non-REM sleep in some children. Night terrors also occur in stage N3 sleep and are common in children age 2 to 5. The child often sits up and cries as if in great fear, sometimes with dilated

pupils and a fast heart rate. During the episode, the child is inconsolable; attempts to calm or wake the child may only cause the screams and fearful behavior to worsen. Like sleep walking, but in contrast to ordinary nightmares, the child usually does not remember the night terror, and the events are typically much more difficult for the parent than the child. The underlying cause of non-REM parasomnias is unknown. They are usually managed by ensuring adequate sleep to reduce pressure for deep non-REM

sleep, reducing stress, and treating underlying sleep disorders such as sleep apnea that might trigger arousals from sleep. Fluid restriction in the evening may help with enuresis. Most children outgrow non-REM parasomnias as their N3 sleep decreases in late adolescence. Drugs that reduce the amount of N3 sleep, such as tricyclic antidepressants, are sometimes used as well. As with REM sleep behavior disorder, people can be seriously hurt sleepwalking if they fall down stairs or trip over furniture, and it is important to make the bedroom layout safe. The amount of time spent in stage N3 sleep is high in individuals with high homeostatic sleep pressure, so getting adequate sleep is also helpful. Sleep Has Many Functions continuously awake were stressful, and it is unclear whether the consequences observed were due to loss of sleep or continuous stress. Indeed, it is not clear if prolonged sleep loss and stress can be dissociated. One proposed function of sleep suggests that a period of brain inactivity is needed to permit metabolic recovery of the brain. The role of adenosine as a sleep- promoting humoral factor is based on the rundown of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) stores to adenosine during the awake period. Another idea is that sleep may permit the body to reconstitute injured tissue and replenish energy stores, but there is little evidence that sleep deprivation impairs any of these processes. A recent hypothesis has been raised by the observation that during sleep the extracellular space in the brain expands, thus permitting the cerebrospinal fluid to "clean out" undesirable molecules that should not be allowed to build up extracellularly. The waking brain has very little extracellular space, largely due to ion fluxes to and from neurons during synaptic communication. These fluxes establish an osmotic gradient that drives most fluid in the brain into cells. During sleep, neurons and glia may shrink as that fluid moves back into the extracellular space. Among the molecules that may be washed out from the extracellular space during sleep are beta-amyloid peptides. In mice engineered to produce high levels of human beta-amyloid, sleep deprivation reduces the clearance of beta-amyloid from the extracellular space in the brain, thus accelerating its deposition in the plaques that are characteristic of Alzheimer disease (Chapter 64). Because buildup of beta-amyloid peptide in the brain is thought to be an early step in Alzheimer disease, work is now underway to determine whether poor sleep may predispose people to this disease. In addition to these biochemical functions, sleep also promotes memory formation. As described earlier, the synaptic homeostasis model suggests that synapses

Although there has been remarkable progress in our

## understanding of the brain circuitry that regulates

sleep and wakefulness, we still understand relatively

little about the actual functions of sleep. For an activity that occupies one-third of the life of humans, and much more in some other species, we have very little understanding of sleep's purposes. Allan Rechtschaffen, who first systematized the stages of sleep (and was an author of this chapter in earlier editions of this book), once said that if sleep did not have a vital function it would be the biggest mistake that evolution ever made. He found that rats would die of overwhelm ing infection and hypothermia if chronically deprived of sleep. However, the methods for keeping animals

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1096

-are rebalanced during sleep, although it is not clear why this process would require sleep. A more basic need may be to provide a time for synapses to consolidate new memory traces. During the waking state, experience can modify synaptic strength on the fly by such processes as protein phosphorylation, insertion of premade receptors into the postsynaptic membrane, or translation of mRNA in the dendrites into new protein. But some portion of the synaptic remodeling that underlies memory formation requires nuclear-dependent transcription of new mRNA. Because synaptic sites on dendrites may be a millimeter from the nucleus or even more in some neurons, time is required for messenger molecules that are produced at the synapse to reach the nucleus and alter transcription and then for

12/12/20 3:26 PM

the resulting mRNA to be transported back to the den-

drite where it can result in new protein synthesis. This

process may require a time when these messengers are

not competing with new incoming signals to complete their work in stabilizing memories. One thing about sleep is certain: It is required for normal brain function, and inadequate sleep, as defined by an increased tendency to fall asleep during

the day, is associated with impaired cognitive function. Medical training programs are now being redesigned to reduce the risk of interns and residents making critical medical decisions while sleep deprived. Similar approaches to school start times, drowsy driving, and other aspects of our society could potentially improve productivity and save many lives. Highlights

1.

Sleep involves distinct changes in the electro-

encephalogram (EEG), electromyogram (EMG),

and electro-oculogram (EOG) that are recorded

- on a polysomnogram. These changes can be used to divide sleep into rapid eye movement (REM) sleep—during which the EEG is similar to wake, but the body has such low muscle tone that it is essentially paralyzed—and three stages of nonREM sleep (N1–N3), with low to high amounts of slow waves in the EEG. 2. During the night, sleep alternates between periods of non-REM sleep followed by bouts of REM sleep, with the entire cycle taking about
- 90 minutes. Over the course of a night, non-REM sleep becomes progressively lighter, while REM sleep bouts become longer. 3. The waking state is actively produced by an ascending arousal network. The key neurons required to drive wakefulness are glutamatergic
- neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei, dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain, glutamatergic neurons in the supramammillary nucleus, and GABAergic and cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain that directly innervate the cerebral cortex. Modulatory cell groups, using mainly monoamines such as norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine as neurotransmitters, can drive arousal under appropriate conditions, but unlike the main pathways, lesions of these cell groups do not impair baseline wakefulness. 4. During sleep, the ascending arousal system is inhibited by GABAergic neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic nuclei and the parafacial zone.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1097

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness


Conversely, during wake, the ventrolateral

preoptic neurons are inhibited by neurons in

the ascending arousal system. These mutually

antagonistic pathways produce a neural circuit resembling an electrical flip-flop switch, which favors rapid and complete transitions between sleep and wakefulness. Similarly, populations of mutually inhibitory neurons in the caudal midbrain and pons govern transitions between REM and non-REM sleep. Monoamine neurotransmitters, such as serotonin and norepinephrine, also act on these switching neurons and prevent transitions into REM sleep during wakefulness. Orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus activate REM sleep-suppressing neurons, preventing transitions from wake into REM sleep. 5. Sleep is regulated by a homeostatic drive to sleep, so that the longer one is awake, the more intense the drive, and the more sleep is required to satisfy

- the need to sleep. There is also a circadian influence on sleep that inhibits sleep during the day but promotes it at night, especially during the latter part of the night, when homeostatic sleep drive wanes. The circadian cycle is synchronized with the outside world by light signals from the retina to the brain's master circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The suprachiasmatic nucleus then activates hypothalamic pathways that regulate wake–sleep states, as well as many other behaviors, hormonal cycles, and physiological adjustments. 6. Sleep needs change throughout development, from about 16 hours per day in a newborn to about 8 hours per day in a healthy young adult.
- However, sleep-promoting mechanisms weaken with aging, and so individuals over 70 years old have more fragmented sleep and sleep about an hour less per day. 7. Sleep apnea is a condition in which the airway collapses due to reduced muscle tone during sleep. This impaired breathing causes frequent
- awakenings and can impair cognition. Restoring airway patency with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) can overcome this problem. 8. Insomnia may be caused by hyperactivation of the arousal system, and it is best treated with cognitive behavioral therapy.
9. Narcolepsy is caused by selective loss of the orexin (also called hypocretin) neurons in the hypothalamus. The orexin neuropeptides nor-
- mally promote wake and regulate REM sleep, and loss of orexin signaling results in chronic daytime sleepiness and poor control of REM sleep.

12/12/20 3:26 PM


Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis

Specifically, people with narcolepsy may quickly

transition into REM sleep after dozing off, and

they can have fragments of REM sleep, such as

- cataplexy and hypnogogic hallucinations, during wake. Narcolepsy is usually treated with medications that promote wake and suppress REM sleep. 10. REM sleep behavior disorder is due to loss of atonia during REM sleep, causing patients to act out their dreams. REM sleep behavior disorder is
- usually an early manifestation of either Parkinson disease or Lewy body dementia. 11. Restless legs syndrome is a genetically influenced disorder in which people feel that they have to move their legs. This makes them very uncom-
- fortable when awake, and they can have periodic leg movements during sleep that disrupt sleep. 12. Sleepwalking and related parasomnias usually occur in young children during deep (stage N3) non-REM sleep. They are best managed by ensur-
- ing adequate, good-quality sleep. 13. Sleep loss impairs the ability to maintain sustained attention and clouds judgment. The reasons for this are not understood. Theories
- about the brain requiring down time to recharge its metabolic status or to allow it to flush out unwanted products from the extracellular space have received attention, but it is unclear whether this accounts for the penalty paid due to lack of sleep. One attractive theory for the function of sleep is that it may be required for synaptic remodeling that is necessary for certain types of learning.

Clifford B. Saper

Thomas E. Scammell Scammell TE, Arrigoni E, Lipton JO. 2017. Neural circuitry of wakefulness and sleep. Neuron 93:747–765.

References Achermann P, Borbely AA. 2003. Mathematical models of

sleep regulation. Front Biosci 8:683–693.

Anaclet C, Pedersen NP, Ferrari LL, et al. 2015. Basal fore-

- brain control of wakefulness and cortical rhythms. Nat Commun 6:8744.
- Aschoff J. 1965. Circadian rhythms in man. Science 148: 1427–1432. Aserinsky E, Kleitman N. 1953. Regularly occurring periods
- of eye motility and concomitant phenomena during sleep. Science 118:273–274.
- Bal T, von Krosigk M, McCormick DA. 1995. Synaptic and membrane mechanisms underlying synchronized oscillations in the ferret lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro. J
- Physiol 483:641–663. Boeve BF. 2013. Idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder in the development of Parkinson's disease. Lancet Neurol 12:469–482.
- Buyssee DJ, Germain A, Hall M, Monk TH, Nofzinger EA. 2011. A neurobiological model of insomnia. Drug Discov Today Dis Models 8:124–137.
- Chemelli RM, Willie JT, Sinton CM, et al. 1999. Narcolepsy in orexin knockout mice: molecular genetics of sleep regulation. Cell 98:437–451.
- Crocker A, Espana RA, Papadopoulou M, et al. 2005. Concomitant loss of dynorphin, NARP, and orexin in narcolepsy. Neurology 65:1184–1188.
- Dement W, Kleitman N. 1957. Cyclic variations in EEG during sleep and their relation to eye movements, body motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol
- Suppl 9:673–690. de Vivo L, Bellesi M, Marshall W, et al. 2017. Ultrastructural evidence for synaptic scaling across the wake/sleep cycle. Science 355:507–510.
- Dijk DJ, Czeisler CA. 1995. Contribution of circadian pacemaker and sleep homeostat to sleep propensity, sleep structure, electroencephalographic slow waves, and sleep
- spindle activity in humans. J Neurosci 15:3526–3538. Fuller PM, Sherman D, Pedersen NP, Saper CB, Lu J. 2011. Reassessment of the structural basis of the ascending arousal system. J Comp Neurol 519:933–956.
- Lim AS, Ellison BA, Wang JL, et al. 2014. Sleep is related to neuron numbers in the ventrolateral preoptic/intermediate nucleus in older adults with and without Alzheimer's
- disease. Brain 137:2847–2861. Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, et al. 1999. The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 2 gene. Cell 98:365–376.
- Lu J, Sherman D, Devor M, Saper CB. 2006. A putative flipflop switch for control of REM sleep. Nature 41:589–594. Mahowald MW, Schenck CH. 2005. Insights from studying
- human sleep disorders. Nature 437:1279–1285. McCormick DA, Bal T. 1997. Sleep and arousal: thalamocorti-
- cal mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 20:185–215.

Selected Reading

Buhr ED, Takahashi JS. 2013. Molecular components of

the mammalian circadian clock. Handb Exp Pharmacol

## 217:3–27.

- Kryger MH, Roth T, Dement WC. 2017. Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier. Saper CB. 2013. The central circadian timing system. Curr
- Opin Neurobiol 23:747–751. Saper CB, Fuller PM, Pedersen NP, Lu J, Scammell TE. 2010.
- Sleep state switches. Neuron 68:1023–1042.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1098

12/12/20 3:26 PM

Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. 1949. Brain stem reticular forma-

tion and activation of the EEG. Electroencephalogr Clin

Neurophysiol Suppl 1:455–473.

- Peyron C, Faraco J, Rogers W, et al. 2000. A mutation in a case of early onset narcolepsy and a generalized absence of hypocretin peptides in human narcoleptic brains. Nat
- Med 6:991–997. Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J. 2005. Hypothalamic regulation of sleep and circadian rhythms. Nature 437:1257–1263.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1099

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness


Stickgold R. 2005. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation.

Nature 437:1272–1278.

Tononi G, Cirelli C. 2014. Sleep and the price of plasticity:

- from synaptic and cellular homeostasis to memory consolidation and integration. Neuron 81:12–34.
- Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, et al. 2013. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science 342:373–377. Xu M, Chung S, Zhang S, et al. 2015 Basal forebrain circuit for
- sleep-wake control. Nat Neurosci 18:1641–1647.

12/12/20 3:26 PM
Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. 1949. Brain stem reticular forma-

tion and activation of the EEG. Electroencephalogr Clin

Neurophysiol Suppl 1:455–473.

- Peyron C, Faraco J, Rogers W, et al. 2000. A mutation in a case of early onset narcolepsy and a generalized absence of hypocretin peptides in human narcoleptic brains. Nat
- Med 6:991–997. Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J. 2005. Hypothalamic regulation of sleep and circadian rhythms. Nature 437:1257–1263.

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1099

Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness


Stickgold R. 2005. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation.

Nature 437:1272–1278.

Tononi G, Cirelli C. 2014. Sleep and the price of plasticity:

- from synaptic and cellular homeostasis to memory consolidation and integration. Neuron 81:12–34.
- Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, et al. 2013. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science 342:373–377. Xu M, Chung S, Zhang S, et al. 2015 Basal forebrain circuit for
- sleep-wake control. Nat Neurosci 18:1641–1647.

12/12/20 3:26 PM

Kandel-Ch44\_1080-1100.indd 1100


12/12/20 3:26 PM

Part VII

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1101

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1102

Preceding Page

Transgenic labeling of a single type of retinal ganglion cell in the mouse retina. Colors

represent depth through the retina, with axons at the surface in blue and the deep-

est dendrites in red. Incompletely understood guidance mechanisms result in J-RGC

dendrites "pointing" ventrally, resulting in their preferential response to ventral motion. J-RGC axons are guided to the optic nerve through which they travel to the rest of the brain. (Reproduced, with permission, from Jinyue Liu and Joshua Sanes. Reproduced, with permission, from Journal of Neuroscience. Cover of issue 37(50), December 13, 2017; for Liu J, Sanes JR. 2017. Cellular and molecular analysis of dendritic morphogenesis in a retinal cell type that senses color contrast and ventral motion. J Neurosci 37:12247–12262.)

10/12/20 8:18 AM


<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1103

Development and the Emergence

## of Behavior

T

he innumerable behaviors controlled by the mature nerv-

ous system—our thoughts, perceptions, decisions, emotions,

and actions—depend on precise patterns of synaptic connectiv-

ity among the billions of neurons in our brain and spinal cord. These connections form during embryonic and early postnatal life but can then be remodeled throughout life. In this section, we describe how the nervous system develops and matures. The history of developmental neurobiology is long and illustrious. Nearly 150 years ago, Santiago Ramón y Cajal undertook a comprehensive series of anatomical studies on the structure and

organization of the nervous system and then set out to probe its development. The only method available to him was light microscopic analysis of fixed tissue, but from his observations, he deduced many developmental principles that are still recognized as correct. During the first half of the 20th century, other anatomists followed in his footsteps. Progress then accelerated as new methods became available—first electrophysiology and electron microscopy and, more recently, molecular biology, genetics, and live imaging. We now know a great deal about molecules that determine how nerve cells acquire their identities, how they extend axons to target cells, and how these axons choose appropriate synaptic partners once they have arrived at their destinations. It is useful to divide the numerous steps that compose neural development into three epochs, which are conceptually distinct even though they overlap temporally to some extent. The first, beginning

at the earliest stages of embryogenesis, leads to the generation and differentiation of neurons and glia. One can think of this epoch as devoted to producing the components from which neural circuits will be assembled: the hardware. These steps depend on the expression of particular genes at particular times and places. Some of the molecules that control these spatial and temporal patterns are transcription factors that act at the level of DNA to regulate gene expression. They act within the differentiating cells and are therefore called cell-autonomous factors. Other factors, called cell non-autonomous, include cell surface and secreted molecules that arise from other cells.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1104

They act by binding to receptors on the differentiating cells and gen-

erating signals that regulate the activity of the cell-autonomous tran-

scriptional programs. The interaction of these intrinsic and extrinsic

factors is critical for the proper differentiation of each nerve cell. A second epoch encompasses the steps by which neurons wire up: the migration of their somata to appropriate places, the guidance of axons to their targets, and the formation of synaptic connections. The

complexity of the wiring problem is staggering—axons of many neuronal types must navigate, often over long distances, and then choose among a hundred or more potential synaptic partners. Nonetheless, progress has been encouraging. A major factor has been the ability to address the problem through the analysis of simple and genetically accessible organisms such as the fruit fly Drosophila and the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans. It turns out that many of the key molecules that control the formation of the nervous system are conserved in organisms separated by millions of years of evolution. Thus, despite the great diversity of animal forms, the developmental programs that govern body plan and neural connectivity are conserved throughout phylogeny. In the third epoch, the genetically determined patterns of connectivity (the hardware) are molded by activity and experience (the software). Unfortunately for investigators, these steps in mammals

are shared to a very limited degree with invertebrates and lower vertebrates. A newly hatched bird or fly is not remarkably different in its behavioral repertoire from its adult self, but no one could say that about a person. This is largely because our nervous system is something of a rough draft at birth. The hardwired circuits that lay out its basic plan are modified over a prolonged postnatal period by experience, acting via neural activity. In this way, the experience of each individual can leave indelible imprints on his or her nervous system and the cognitive abilities of the brain can be enhanced by learning. These processes act in all mammals, and neuroscientists now use mice to probe the mechanisms that underlie them—but they are especially prominent and prolonged in humans. It may be that the prolonged period during which experience can sculpt the human nervous system is the most important single factor in making its capabilities unique among all species. As our understanding of development increases, it is increasingly informing neurology and psychiatry. Many genes that regulate the first two epochs have now been implicated as susceptibility fac-

tors for, or even causes of, some neurodegenerative and behavioral disorders. Thus, studies of neural development are beginning to provide insights into the etiology of neurological diseases and to suggest rational strategies for restoring neural connections and function after disease or traumatic injury. More recently, as we learn about the cellular and molecular changes that underlie experience-dependent remodeling, we can hope to understand how, for example, the plasticity that is so evident during early life can be recruited in adults to

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1105

improve rehabilitative therapy after injury, stroke, or neurodegenera-

tive disease. Moreover, there is increasing reason to believe that some

behavioral disorders, such as autism or schizophrenia, may result in

part from defects in the experience-dependent tuning of neural circuits during early postnatal life. Part VII summarizes these epochs in a sequential manner. Beginning with the early stages of neural development, we concentrate on the factors that control the diversity and survival of nerve cells, guide

axons, and regulate the formation of synapses. We then explain how interactions with the environment, both social and physical, modify or consolidate the neural connections formed during early development. Finally, we examine ways in which developmental processes can be harnessed in adults and how factors such as steroid hor -mones mold the brain, affecting sexual and gender identity. The last steps—changes that occur as the brain ages—are covered in Section IX (Chapter 64). Part Editor: Joshua R. Sanes

Patterning the Nervous System

Part VII

Chapter 45

| Chapter 46  Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells  Chapter 47  The Growth and Guidance of Axons  Chapter 48  Formation and Elimination of Synapses  Chapter 49  Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic  Connections  Chapter 50  Repairing the Damaged Brain  Chapter 51  Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1106


10/12/20 8:18 AM


Patterning the Nervous System

The Neural Tube Arises From the Ectoderm

Secreted Signals Promote Neural Cell Fate

## Development of the Neural Plate Is Induced by Signals

## From the Organizer Region Neural Induction Is Mediated by Peptide Growth Factors

and Their Inhibitors Rostrocaudal Patterning of the Neural Tube Involves

Signaling Gradients and Secondary Organizing Centers The Neural Tube Becomes Regionalized Early

## in Development Signals From the Mesoderm and Endoderm Define the

Rostrocaudal Pattern of the Neural Plate Signals From Organizing Centers Within the Neural Tube

Pattern the Forebrain, Midbrain, and Hindbrain Repressive Interactions Divide the Hindbrain

Into Segments Dorsoventral Patterning of the Neural Tube Involves Similar

Mechanisms at Different Rostrocaudal Levels The Ventral Neural Tube Is Patterned by Sonic Hedgehog

## Protein Secreted from the Notochord and Floor Plate The Dorsal Neural Tube Is Patterned by Bone

Morphogenetic Proteins Dorsoventral Patterning Mechanisms Are Conserved

Along the Rostrocaudal Extent of the Neural Tube Local Signals Determine Functional Subclasses

of Neurons Rostrocaudal Position Is a Major Determinant of Motor

## Neuron Subtype Local Signals and Transcriptional Circuits Further

Diversify Motor Neuron Subtypes The Developing Forebrain Is Patterned by Intrinsic and

Extrinsic Influences

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1107

Inductive Signals and Transcription Factor Gradients

Establish Regional Differentiation

Afferent Inputs Also Contribute to Regionalization

Highlights

A

vast array of neurons and glial cells is

produced during development of the verte-

brate nervous system. Different types of neu-

rons develop in discrete anatomical positions, acquire varied morphological forms, and establish connections with specific populations of target cells. Their diversity is far greater than that of cells in any other organ of the body. The retina, for example, has dozens of types of interneurons, and the spinal cord has more than a hundred types of motor neurons. At present, the true number of neuronal types in the mammalian central nervous system remains unknown, but it is surely more than a thousand. The number of glial types is even less clear; unexpected heterogeneity is being discovered in what was thought, until recently, to be rather homogeneous classes of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. The diversity of neuronal types underlies the impressive computational properties of the mammalian nervous system. Yet, as we describe in this chapter

and those that follow, the developmental principles that drive the differentiation of the nervous system are begged and borrowed from those used to direct the development in other tissues. In one sense, the development of the nervous system merely represents an elaborate example of the basic challenge that pervades

10/12/20 8:18 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

all of developmental biology: how to convert a single

cell, the fertilized egg, into the highly differentiated

cell types that characterize the mature organism. Only

at later stages, as the neurons form complex circuits and experience modifies their connections, do principles of neural development diverge from those in other organs. Early developmental principles are conserved not only among tissues but also across species and phyla. Indeed, much of what we know about the cellular and

molecular bases of neural development in vertebrates comes from genetic studies of so-called simple organisms, most notably the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and the worm Caenorhabditis elegans. Nevertheless, because a main goal of studying neural development is to explain how the assembly of the nervous system underlies both human behavior and brain disorders, our description of the rules and principles of nervous system development focus primarily on vertebrate organisms. The Neural Tube Arises From the Ectoderm

The vertebrate embryo arises from the fertilized egg.

## Cell divisions initially form a ball of cells, called the

morula, which then hollows out to form the blastula.

Next, infoldings and growth generate the gastrula, a structure with polarity (dorsal-ventral and anteriorposterior) and three layers of cells—the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm (Figure 45–1A). The endoderm is the innermost germ layer that later gives rise to the gut, as well as to the lungs, pancreas, and liver. The mesoderm is the middle germ

layer that gives rise to muscle, connective tissues, and much of the vascular system. The ectoderm is the outermost layer. Most of the ectoderm gives rise to the skin, but a narrow central strip flattens out to become the neural plate (Figure 45–1B). It is from the neural plate that the central and peripheral nervous systems arise. Soon after the neural plate forms, it begins to invaginate, forming the neural groove. The folds then deepen and eventually separate from the rest of the

ectoderm to form the neural tube, through a process called neurulation (Figure 45–1C,D). The caudal region of the neural tube gives rise to the spinal cord, whereas the rostral region becomes the brain. As the neural tube closes, cells at its junction with the overlying ectoderm are set aside to become the neural crest, which eventually gives rise to the autonomic and sensory nervous systems, as well as several nonneural cell types (Figure 45–1E).

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1108

Secreted Signals Promote Neural Cell Fate

As with other organs, the emergence of the nervous

## system is the culmination of a complex molecular pro-

gram that involves the tightly orchestrated expression

of specific genes. For the nervous system, the first step is the formation of the neural plate from a restricted region of the ectoderm. This step reflects the outcome of an early choice that ectodermal cells have to make: whether to become neural or epidermal cells. This decision has been the subject of intense study for nearly 100 years. Much of this work has focused on a search for signals that control the fate of ectodermal cells. We now know that two major classes of proteins work together

to promote the differentiation of an ectodermal cell into a neural cell. The first are inductive factors, signaling molecules that are secreted by nearby cells. Some of these factors are freely diffusible and exert their actions at a distance, but others are tethered to the cell surface and act locally. The second are surface receptors that enable cells to respond to inductive factors. Activation of these receptors triggers the expression of genes encoding intracellular proteins—transcription factors, enzymes, and cytoskeletal proteins—that push ectodermal cells along the pathway to becoming neural cells. The ability of a cell to respond to inductive signals, termed its competence, depends on the exact repertoire of receptors, transduction molecules, and transcrip-

tion factors that it expresses. Thus, a cell's fate is determined not only by the signals to which it is exposed—a consequence of when and where it finds itself in the embryo—but also by the profile of genes it expresses as a consequence of its prior developmental history. We will see in subsequent chapters that the interaction of localized inductive signals and intrinsic cell responsiveness is evident at virtually every step throughout neural development. Development of the Neural Plate Is Induced by

Signals From the Organizer Region

## The discovery that specific signals are responsible for triggering the formation of the neural plate was the first major advance in understanding the mechanisms

that pattern the nervous system. In 1924, Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold made the remarkable observation that the differentiation of the neural plate from uncommitted ectoderm depends on signals secreted by a specialized group of cells they called the organizer region.

10/12/20 8:18 AM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

all of developmental biology: how to convert a single

cell, the fertilized egg, into the highly differentiated

cell types that characterize the mature organism. Only

at later stages, as the neurons form complex circuits and experience modifies their connections, do principles of neural development diverge from those in other organs. Early developmental principles are conserved not only among tissues but also across species and phyla. Indeed, much of what we know about the cellular and

molecular bases of neural development in vertebrates comes from genetic studies of so-called simple organisms, most notably the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and the worm Caenorhabditis elegans. Nevertheless, because a main goal of studying neural development is to explain how the assembly of the nervous system underlies both human behavior and brain disorders, our description of the rules and principles of nervous system development focus primarily on vertebrate organisms. The Neural Tube Arises From the Ectoderm

The vertebrate embryo arises from the fertilized egg.

## Cell divisions initially form a ball of cells, called the

morula, which then hollows out to form the blastula.

Next, infoldings and growth generate the gastrula, a structure with polarity (dorsal-ventral and anteriorposterior) and three layers of cells—the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm (Figure 45–1A). The endoderm is the innermost germ layer that later gives rise to the gut, as well as to the lungs, pancreas, and liver. The mesoderm is the middle germ

layer that gives rise to muscle, connective tissues, and much of the vascular system. The ectoderm is the outermost layer. Most of the ectoderm gives rise to the skin, but a narrow central strip flattens out to become the neural plate (Figure 45–1B). It is from the neural plate that the central and peripheral nervous systems arise. Soon after the neural plate forms, it begins to invaginate, forming the neural groove. The folds then deepen and eventually separate from the rest of the

ectoderm to form the neural tube, through a process called neurulation (Figure 45–1C,D). The caudal region of the neural tube gives rise to the spinal cord, whereas the rostral region becomes the brain. As the neural tube closes, cells at its junction with the overlying ectoderm are set aside to become the neural crest, which eventually gives rise to the autonomic and sensory nervous systems, as well as several nonneural cell types (Figure 45–1E).

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1108

Secreted Signals Promote Neural Cell Fate

As with other organs, the emergence of the nervous

## system is the culmination of a complex molecular pro-

gram that involves the tightly orchestrated expression

of specific genes. For the nervous system, the first step is the formation of the neural plate from a restricted region of the ectoderm. This step reflects the outcome of an early choice that ectodermal cells have to make: whether to become neural or epidermal cells. This decision has been the subject of intense study for nearly 100 years. Much of this work has focused on a search for signals that control the fate of ectodermal cells. We now know that two major classes of proteins work together

to promote the differentiation of an ectodermal cell into a neural cell. The first are inductive factors, signaling molecules that are secreted by nearby cells. Some of these factors are freely diffusible and exert their actions at a distance, but others are tethered to the cell surface and act locally. The second are surface receptors that enable cells to respond to inductive factors. Activation of these receptors triggers the expression of genes encoding intracellular proteins—transcription factors, enzymes, and cytoskeletal proteins—that push ectodermal cells along the pathway to becoming neural cells. The ability of a cell to respond to inductive signals, termed its competence, depends on the exact repertoire of receptors, transduction molecules, and transcrip-

tion factors that it expresses. Thus, a cell's fate is determined not only by the signals to which it is exposed—a consequence of when and where it finds itself in the embryo—but also by the profile of genes it expresses as a consequence of its prior developmental history. We will see in subsequent chapters that the interaction of localized inductive signals and intrinsic cell responsiveness is evident at virtually every step throughout neural development. Development of the Neural Plate Is Induced by

Signals From the Organizer Region

## The discovery that specific signals are responsible for triggering the formation of the neural plate was the first major advance in understanding the mechanisms

that pattern the nervous system. In 1924, Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold made the remarkable observation that the differentiation of the neural plate from uncommitted ectoderm depends on signals secreted by a specialized group of cells they called the organizer region.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Figure 45–1 The neural plate

folds to form the neural

tube. (Scanning electron micro-

graphs of chick neural tube reproduced, with permission, from G. Schoenwolf.) A. Following fertilization of the egg by sperm, cell divisions give rise successively to the morula, blastula,

- and gastrula. Three germ cell layers—the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm—form during gastrulation. B. A strip of ectoderm becomes the neural plate, the precursor of the central and peripheral nervous
- systems. C. The neural plate buckles at its midline to form the neural groove. D. Closure of the dorsal neural folds
- forms the neural tube. E. The neural tube lies over the
- notochord and is flanked by somites, an ovoid group of meso-
- dermal cells that give rise to muscle and cartilage. Cells at the junction between the neural tube and overrlying ectoderm are set aside to become the neural crest.

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System

Mesoderm

Endoderm


Ectoderm

<!-- image -->

Their experiments involved transplanting small

pieces of tissue from one amphibian embryo to

another. Most telling were transplantations of the dor-

sal lip of the blastopore, which is destined to form the dorsal mesoderm, from its normal dorsal position to the ventral side of a host embryo. The dorsal lip lies

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1109

underneath the dorsal ectoderm, a region that nor-

mally gives rise to dorsal epidermis, including the

neural plate (Figure 45–2). They grafted the tissue from

a pigmented embryo into unpigmented host, allowing them to distinguish the position and fate of donor and host cells.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

A


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Donor embryo

Normal

embryo


Host

embryo of the host embryo. Host ectodermal cells were induced to form a virtually complete copy of the nervous sys- tem (Figure 45–2). They therefore called the donor tis-

<!-- image -->

from Eduardo de Robertis.)

Left: In the normal frog, embryo cells from the organizer region (the dorsal blastopore lip) populate the notochord, floor plate, and somites. Right: Spemann and Mangold grafted the dor-

sal blastopore lip from an early gastrula stage embryo into a region of a host embryo that normally gives rise to the ventral epidermis. Signals from grafted cells induce a second embryonic axis, which includes a virtually complete neural tube. The donor tissue was from a pigmented embryo, whereas the host tissue was unpigmented, permitting the fate of grafted cells to be monitored by their color. Grafted cells themselves contribute only to the notochord, floor plate, and somites of the host embryo. As the embryo matures, the secondary neural tube develops into a complete nervous system. In the Xenopus embryo shown in the micrograph, the second neural axis was induced by injection of an antagonist of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), in effect substituting for the organizer signal (Figure 45–3). The primary neural axis is also apparent. (Abbreviations: D, dorsal; V, ventral.)

Spemann and Mangold found that transplanted

cells from the dorsal lip of the blastopore followed their

normal developmental program, generating midline

mesoderm tissue such as the somites and notochord. But the transplanted cells also caused a striking change in the fate of the neighboring ventral ectodermal cells

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1110

D sue the organizer. Spemann and Mangold went on to show that the dorsal lip of the blastopore was the only tissue that possessed this "organizing" effect. These pioneering studies also demonstrated that "induction" plays a critical role in neural development. Induction is a process by which cells of one tis-

sue direct the development of neighboring cells at a region where the two come into proximity. The importance is that it provides a mechanism by which signals from one tissue can lead to subdivision of a second tissue. In this case, the mesoderm induces one part of the ectoderm to become the neural plate, and eventually the nervous system, while the remainder goes on to become epithelium, and eventually skin. The new juxtaposition thereby formed could, in principle, set the stage for a cascade of subsequent inductions and subdivisions. Indeed, we will see that many aspects of neural tube patterning are now known to depend on signals secreted by local organizing centers through actions similar in principle to that of the classical organizer region. Neural Induction Is Mediated by Peptide Growth Factors and Their Inhibitors

## For decades after Spemann and Mangold's pioneering studies, identification of the neural inducer con-

stituted a Holy Grail of developmental biology. The

search was marked by little success until the 1980s, when the advent of molecular biology and the availability of better markers of early neural tissue led to breakthroughs in our understanding of neural induction and its chemical mediators. The first advance came from a simple finding: When the early ectoderm is dissociated into single isolated cells, effectively preventing cell-to-cell signal-

ing, the cells readily acquire neural properties in the absence of added factors (Figure 45–3A). The surprising implication of this finding was that the "default" fate of ectodermal cells is neural differentiation and that this fate is prevented by signaling among ectodermal cells. In this model, the long sought-after "inducer" is actually a "de-repressor": It prevents ectoderm from repressing neural fate. These ideas immediately raised two further questions. What ectodermal signal represses neural differentiation, and what does organizer tissue provide to

overcome the effects of the repressor? Studies of neural induction in frogs and chicks have now provided answers to these questions.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

A

Ectodermal

cells Epidermal cells Neural cells BMP signaling

<!-- image -->

A. In Xenopus frog embryos, signals from the organizer region

(red line) spread through the ectoderm to induce neural tissue. Ectodermal tissue that is beyond the range of organizer signals

gives rise to epidermis. B. BMP inhibitors secreted from the organizer region (including noggin, follistatin, and chordin) bind to BMPs and block the

In the absence of signals from the organizer, ecto-

dermal cells synthesize and secrete bone morphogenetic

proteins (BMPs), members of a large family of transform-

ing growth factor β (TGFβ)-related proteins. The BMPs, acting through serine/threonine kinase class receptors on ectodermal cells, suppress the potential for neural differentiation and promote epidermal differentiation (Figure 43–3B). Key evidence for the role of BMPs as

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1111

Chordin

Noggin

Follistatin

Neural

C. Ectodermal cells acquire neural or epidermal character

depending on the presence or absence of BMP signaling. When ectodermal cell aggregates are exposed to BMP signaling,

they differentiate into epidermal tissue. When BMP signaling is blocked, either by dissociating ectodermal tissue into single cells or by addition of BMP inhibitors to ectodermal cell aggregates, the cells differentiate into neural tissue.

neural repressors came from experiments in which a

truncated version of a BMP receptor, which blocks BMP

signaling, was found to trigger the differentiation of

neural tissue in the Xenopus frog embryo. Conversely, exposure of ectodermal cells to BMP signaling promoted differentiation as epidermal cells (Figure 45–3C). The identification of BMPs as suppressors of neuronal differentiation in turn suggested that the

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System

B



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

organizer might induce neural differentiation in ecto-

dermal cells by secreting factors that antagonize BMP

signaling. Direct support for this idea came from the

finding that cells of the organizer region express many secreted proteins that act as BMP antagonists. These proteins include noggin, chordin, follistatin, and even some variant BMP proteins. Each of these proteins has the ability to induce ectodermal cells to differentiate into neural tissue (Figure 45–3B). Thus, there is no single neural inducer. In fact, multiple classes of proteins are required for induction, as shown by the later finding that the exposure of ectodermal cells to fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) is also a necessary step in neural differentiation. Together, these studies provided a molecular explanation of the cellular phenomenon of neural induction. Although many details of the pathway mature central nervous system. Differences in the rate of proliferation of cells in rostral regions of the neu- ral tube result in the formation of three brain vesicles:

the forebrain (or prosencephalic) vesicle, the midbrain (or mesencephalic) vesicle, and the hindbrain (or rhombencephalic) vesicle (Figure 45–4A). At this early three-vesicle stage, the neural tube flexes twice: once at the cervical flexure, at the junction of the spinal cord and hindbrain, and once at the

-cephalic flexure, at the junction of the hindbrain and midbrain. A third flexure, the pontine flexure, forms later, and later still, the cervical flexure straightens out and becomes indistinct (Figure 45–4D). The cephalic flexure remains prominent throughout development, and its persistence is the reason why the orientation of the longitudinal axis of the forebrain deviates from that of the brain stem and spinal cord. As the neural tube develops, two of the primary embryonic vesicles divide further, thus forming five vesicles (Figure 45–4B,C). The forebrain vesicle divides

remain to be clarified and some mechanistic differ ences among species remain perplexing, a key chapter in neural development has now been brought to a satisfying conclusion nearly a century after the organizer was discovered by Spemann and Mangold. Rostrocaudal Patterning of the Neural Tube

Involves Signaling Gradients and Secondary

Organizing Centers

## As soon as cells of the neural plate have been induced, they begin to acquire regional characteristics that mark

the first steps in dividing the nervous system into

regions such as forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. The subdivision is directed by a series of secreted inductive factors and follows the same basic principles of neural induction. Neural plate cells in different regions of the neural tube respond to these inductive signals by expressing distinct transcription factors that gradually constrain the developmental potential of cells in each local domain. In this way, neurons in different positions acquire functional differences. Signaling occurs along both the rostrocaudal and the dorsoventral axes of the neural tube. We begin by describing rostrocaudal patterning and then return to dorsoventral patterning. The Neural Tube Becomes Regionalized

Early in Development

## After the neural tube forms, cells divide rapidly, but rates of proliferation are not uniform. Individual regions of the neural epithelium expand at different

rates and begin to form the specialized parts of the

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1112

to form the telencephalon, which will give rise to the cortex, hippocampus, and basal ganglia, and the diencephalon, which will give rise to the thalamus, hypothalamus, and retina. The mesencephalon, which does not divide further, gives rise to the inferior and superior colliculi and other midbrain structures. The hindbrain vesicle divides to form the metencephalon, which will give rise to the pons and cerebellum, and the myelencephalon, which will give rise to the medulla. Together with the spinal cord, these divisions make up the major functional regions of the mature central nervous system (see Chapter 4). The progressive subdivision of the neural tube into these functional domains is regulated by a variety of secreted signals. Signals From the Mesoderm and Endoderm Define the Rostrocaudal Pattern of the Neural Plate

## It was originally believed that the organizer, as defined by Spemann and Mangold, was uniform in character,

and therefore induced an initially uniform neural plate.

Subsequent studies showed, however, that the organizer is regionally specialized and secretes factors that initiate the rostrocaudal patterning of the neural plate almost as soon as induction commences. One important class of factors comprises the Wnt proteins (an acronym based on their founding family members, the Drosophila Wingless protein and the mammalian Int1 proto-oncogene protein). Others include retinoic acid and FGFs. They are produced by mesodermal cells of the organizer as well as nearby paraxial mesoderm. The net level of Wnt signaling activity is low at rostral levels of the neural plate and increases

10/12/20 8:18 AM

A Three-vesicle stage


Proencephalon B Five-vesicle stage Lateral ventricle

1a

<!-- image -->

brain vesicles, which will form the prosencephalon (forebrain),

mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain).

B. Further division within the prosencephalon and rhombencephalon generate additional vesicles. The prosencephalon splits to form the telencephalon and diencephalon, and the

progressively in the caudal direction. This activity

gradient arises because the mesoderm adjacent to the

caudal region of the neural plate expresses high levels

of Wnt. Sharpening this gradient, tissue that underlies the rostral region of the neural plate is a source of secreted proteins that inhibit Wnt signaling, much as BMP inhibitors attenuate BMP signaling at an earlier stage. Thus, cells at progressively more caudal positions along the neural plate are exposed to increasing levels of Wnt activity and acquire a more caudal regional character, spanning the entire range from forebrain to midbrain to hindbrain and finally to spinal cord (Figure 45–5A). These results suggest that an anterior character is the "default" state for neural tissue, with signals such as Wnt imposing a posterior character. Indeed, when ectodermal cells are induced to become neural by application of BMP inhibitors, they differentiate into cells characteristic of anterior structures.

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1113

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System


Telencephalon

Diencephalon

rhombencephalon splits to form the metencephalon and the

C. Top-down view of the neural tube of a chick embryo at the

five-vesicle stage. (Reproduced, with permission, from G. Schoenwolf.)

- D. The neural tube bends at borders between vesicles, forming the cephalic, pontine, and cervical flexures.

Signals From Organizing Centers Within the

Neural Tube Pattern the Forebrain, Midbrain,

and Hindbrain

## The early influence of mesodermal and endodermal tissues on rostrocaudal neural pattern is further

refined by signals from specialized cell groups in the

neural tube itself. One that has been studied in particular detail is called the isthmic organizer, which forms at the boundary of the hindbrain and midbrain (Figure 45–5B). The isthmic organizer serves a key role in patterning these two domains of the neural tube as well as in specifying the neuronal types within them. Dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area are generated in the midbrain, just rostral to the isthmic organizer, whereas serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei are generated just caudal to the isthmic organizer, within the hindbrain. As an illustration of how these secondary neural signaling

10/12/20 8:18 AM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

centers impose neural pattern, we describe the origin

and signaling activities of the isthmic organizer.

The rostrocaudal positional character of the neural

plate stems from the expression of homeodomain transcription factors, the homeodomain being a section of

the protein that binds to a specific DNA sequence in regulatory regions of genes, leading to changes in the gene's transcription. Cells in forebrain and midbrain domains of the neural plate express Otx2, whereas cells in the hindbrain domain express Gbx2, both of which are homeodomain transcription factors. The point of transition between Otx2 and Gbx2 expression A Neural plate A

Wnt signals

Hindbrain Spinal cord is located at the midbrain–hindbrain boundary (Figure

45–5B) and marks the position at which the isthmic

organizer will emerge after neural tube closure. At this

boundary, other transcription factors are expressed, notably En1 (an Engrailed class transcription factor). These transcription factors in turn control the expression of two signaling factors, Wnt1 and FGF8, by cells of the isthmic organizer. Wnt1 is involved in

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1114

P the proliferation of cells in the midbrain–hindbrain domain and in the maintenance of FGF8 expression. The spread of FGF8 from the isthmic organizer into the midbrain domain marked by Otx2 expression induces differentiation of dopaminergic neurons, whereas its spread into the hindbrain domain marked by Gbx2 expression triggers the differentiation of serotonergic neurons (Figure 45–5C). The roles of FGF8 and Wnt1 in signaling from the isthmic organizer illustrate an important economy in early neural patterning. The early actions of inductive

Figure 45–5 (Left) Early anteroposterior patterning signals establish distinct transcription factor domains and define signals impose discrete domains of transcription factor expression, and these transcriptional domains then allow cells to interpret the actions of the same secreted factor in different ways, producing different neuronal subtypes. In this way, a relatively small number of secreted factors—FGFs, BMPs, hedgehog proteins, Wnt proteins, and retinoic acid—are used in different regions and at different times to program the vast diversity of neuronal cell types generated within the central and peripheral nervous systems.

the position of the midbrain–hindbrain boundary region.

A. The anteroposterior pattern of the neural plate is established by exposure of neural cells to a gradient of Wnt signals. Anterior (A) regions of the neural plate are exposed to Wnt inhibitors

secreted from the endoderm and thus perceive only low levels of Wnt activity. Progressively more posterior (P) regions of the neural plate are exposed to high levels of Wnt signaling from the paraxial mesoderm and to lower levels of Wnt inhibitors. B. In response to this Wnt signaling gradient and other signals, cells in anterior and posterior regions of the neural plate begin to express different transcription factors: Otx2 at anterior levels

and Gbx2 at more posterior levels. The intersection of these two transcription factor domains marks the region of the midbrain–hindbrain boundary (MHB), where Engrailed transcription factors are expressed. The neural tube then forms segments anterior and posterior to the MHB. C. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signals from the isthmic organizer act in concert with sonic hedgehog (Shh) signals from the ventral midline to specify the identity and position of

dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons. The distinct fates of these two classes of neurons result from the expression of Otx2 in the midbrain and Gbx2 in the hindbrain. (Adapted, with permission, from Wurst and Bally-Cuif 2001. Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Figure 45–6 Local signaling centers in the devel-

oping neural tube. This side view of the neural tube

at a later stage shows the positions of three key

signaling centers that pattern the neural tube along the anterior-posterior axis: the anterior neural ridge, the zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI) at the boundary between the rostral and caudal forebrain (diencephalon), and the isthmic organizer, the boundary of the midbrain and hindbrain. The ZLI is a source of sonic hedgehog, and the isthmic organizer and anterior neural ridge are sources of fibroblast growth factor (see Figure 45–5).

Other cell groups serve similar roles in subdivid-

ing the neural tube into domains. For example, at the Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System Isthmic organizer

<!-- image -->

very rostral margin of the neural tube, a specialized the wrong rhombomere. This intermingling is recti- fied in several ways, one of which is a second inhibi-

group of cells, called the anterior neural ridge, secretes FGF that patterns the telencephalon (Figure 45–6). More caudally is a restricted region called the zona limitans intrathalamica, which appears as a pair of hornlike spurs within the diencephalon. Zona limitans intrathalamica cells secrete the protein sonic hedgehog (Shh), which patterns nearby cells that give rise to the nuclei of the thalamus. FGFs and Shh are described in detail below in the context of their prominent role in patterning the cortex and spinal cord, respectively. Repressive Interactions Divide the Hindbrain Into Segments

## An important next step in patterning the neural tube along the rostrocaudal axis is the subdivision of the forebrain and hindbrain into segments, compartmen-

tal units that are arrayed along the rostrocaudal axis. These units are called prosomeres in the forebrain and rhombomeres in the hindbrain. We use the formation of rhombomeres 3 and 4 (of 7 total) to illustrate the mechanisms leading to segmentation (Figure 45–7). An initial morphogen gradient

leads to expression of two distinct transcription factors in this region—krox20 in what will become rhombomere 3, endowing these cells with a rhombomere 3 identity, and hoxb1 in what will become rhombomere 4, endowing these cells with a rhombomere 4 identity. Cells near the border express both factors and therefore have an uncertain identity. However, these two factors inhibit each other's expression, so eventually the identity of each cell is fixed.

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1115

tory interaction, this one of a markedly different type. Krox20 and Hoxb1 induce the expression of cell surface recognition and signaling molecules called EphA4 and ephrinB3, respectively. These two proteins bind to each other, leading to transmission of a repulsive signal that separates the cells. We will see below that this repulsion is also key to later decisions that axons make as they grow to their targets. In the hindbrain, before neurons form, it sharpens the borders between rhombomeres. More broadly, rhombomere segregation provides another example of a general theme in neural development: that inductive or adhesive interactions combine with repressive or inhibitory ones to pattern the nervous system. Dorsoventral Patterning of the Neural Tube

Involves Similar Mechanisms at Different

Rostrocaudal Levels

## As the neural epithelium acquires its rostrocaudal character, cells located at different positions along its

dorsoventral axis also begin to acquire distinct iden-

tities. Together, patterning along the rostrocaudal and dorsoventral axes divides the neural tube into a threedimensional grid of molecularly distinct cell types, leading eventually to generation of the various neuronal and glial cell types that distinguish one part of the nervous system from another. In contrast to the diversity of signals and organizing centers responsible for rostrocaudal patterning of developing neurons, there is a striking consistency in

10/12/20 8:18 AM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

the strategies and principles that establish dorsoven-

tral pattern. We focus initially on the mechanisms of

dorsoventral patterning at caudal levels of the neural

tube that give rise to the spinal cord and then describe how similar strategies are used to pattern the forebrain. Neurons in the spinal cord serve two major functions. They relay cutaneous sensory input to higher centers in the brain, and they transform sensory input

into motor output. The neuronal circuits that mediate these functions are segregated anatomically. Circuits involved in the processing of cutaneous sensory

A Induction of segmental identity

Anterior Posterior

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1116

Retinoic

acid information are located in the dorsal half of the spinal cord, whereas those involved in the control of motor output are mainly located in the ventral half of the spi- nal cord. The neurons that form these circuits are generated at different positions along the dorsoventral axis of the spinal cord in a patterning process that begins with the establishment of distinct progenitor cell types. Motor neurons are generated close to the ventral midline, and most of the interneuron classes that control motor out -put are generated just dorsal to the position at which motor neurons appear (Figure 45–8). The dorsal half of the neural tube generates projection neurons and local circuit interneurons that process incoming sensory information. How are the position and identity of spinal neurons established? The dorsoventral patterning of the neural tube is initiated by signals from mesodermal and ectodermal cells that lie close to the ventral and dorsal poles of the neural tube and is perpetuated by signals from two midline neural organizing centers. Ventral patterning signals are initially provided by the notochord, a mesodermal cell group that lies immediately under the ventral neural tube (Figure 45–1). This signaling activity is transferred to the floor plate, a specialized glial cell group that sits at the ventral midline of the neural tube itself. Similarly, dorsal signals are provided initially by cells of the epidermal ectoderm that span the dorsal midline of the neural tube, and subsequently by the roof plate, a glial cell group embedded at the dorsal midline of the neural tube (Figure 45–8). Thus, neural patterning is initiated through a process of homogenetic induction, in which like begets like: Notochord signals induce the floor plate, which Figure 45–7 (Left) Repressive interactions divide the hindbrain into rhombomeres.  The sharp border between hindbrain rhom- bomeres 3 and 4 forms in several steps. (Adapted, with permission,

from Addison and Wilkinson 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc.)

A. A gradient of retinoic acid upregulates expression of hoxb1 in anterior cells (blue) and krox20 in posterior cells (yellow), with some cells at the prospective border expressing both genes (green). B. Hoxb1 expression and Krox20 expression become mutually exclusive, thus endowing each cell with a unique molecular identity. C. Cells trapped in the wrong domain migrate to sharpen the border.

- D. Inhibitory interactions underlying border formation. Hoxb1 and Krox20 repress each other's expression in individual cells, so a mod-
2. est imbalance in level leads to exclusive expression of one factor.
3. Krox20 then upregulates EphA4 in r3 cells, whereas ephrinB3 is upregulated in r4 cells. EphA4 and ephrinB3 repel each other, driving migration of isolated cells and sharpening the segment border.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Figure 45–8 Distinct precursor popu-

lations form along the dorsoventral

axis of the developing spinal cord.

A. The neural plate is generated from ectodermal cells that overlie the noto chord (N) and the future somites (S).

It is flanked by the epidermal ectoderm. (See also Figure 45–1) B. The neural plate folds dorsally at its midline to form the neural fold. Floor plate cells (blue) differentiate at the

ventral midline of the neural tube.

- C. The neural tube forms by fusion of the dorsal tips of the neural folds. Roof plate cells form at the dorsal midline

of the neural tube. Neural crest cells migrate from the neural tube into and past the somites before populating the sensory and sympathetic ganglia. D. Distinct classes of neurons are generated at different dorsoventral positions in the embryonic spinal cord. Ventral

interneurons (V0–V3) and motor neu

rons (MN) differentiate from progenitor domains in the ventral spinal cord. Six classes of early dorsal interneurons (D1 – D6) develop in the dorsal half of the spinal cord. (Adapted from Goulding et al. 2002.)

<!-- image -->

induces ventral neurons, and signals from ectoderm

induce the roof plate, which induces dorsal neurons.

This strategy ensures that inductive signals are posi-

tioned appropriately to control neural cell fate and pattern over a prolonged period of development, as tissues grow and cells move. The Ventral Neural Tube Is Patterned by Sonic

Hedgehog Protein Secreted from the Notochord and

Floor Plate

## Within the ventral half of the neural tube, the identity and position of developing motor neurons and local

interneurons depend on the inductive activity of the

Shh protein, which is secreted by the notochord and subsequently by the floor plate. Shh is a member of a family of secreted proteins related to the Drosophila hedgehog protein, which had been discovered earlier and shown to control many aspects of embryonic development. Shh signaling is necessary for the induction of each of the neuronal classes generated in the ventral half of the spinal cord. How can a single inductive

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1117

V2

MN

signal specify the fate of at least half a dozen neuronal

classes? The answer lies in the ability of Shh to act as a

morphogen—a signal that can direct different cell fates

at different concentration thresholds. The secretion of Shh from the notochord and floor plate establishes a ventral-to-dorsal gradient of Shh protein activity in the ventral neural tube, such that progenitor cells occupying different dorsoventral positions within the neural epithelium are exposed to small (two- to three-fold) differences in ambient Shh signaling activity. Different levels of Shh signaling activity direct progenitor cells in different ventral domains to differentiation as motor neurons and interneurons (Figure 45–9A). These findings raise two additional questions. How is the spread of Shh protein within the ventral neural epithelium controlled in such a precise manner?

And how are small differences in Shh signaling activity converted into all-or-none decisions about the identity of progenitor cells in the ventral neural tube? Active Shh protein is synthesized from a larger precursor protein, cleaved through an unusual autocatalytic process that involves a serine protease-like

activity resident within the carboxy terminus of the precursor protein. Cleavage generates an amino

10/12/20 8:18 AM

A Neural plate Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System D Embryonic spinal cord Ectoderm D2

D3

D4

D5

D6

V0

V1
Figure 45–8 Distinct precursor popu-

lations form along the dorsoventral

axis of the developing spinal cord.

A. The neural plate is generated from ectodermal cells that overlie the noto chord (N) and the future somites (S).

It is flanked by the epidermal ectoderm. (See also Figure 45–1) B. The neural plate folds dorsally at its midline to form the neural fold. Floor plate cells (blue) differentiate at the

ventral midline of the neural tube.

- C. The neural tube forms by fusion of the dorsal tips of the neural folds. Roof plate cells form at the dorsal midline

of the neural tube. Neural crest cells migrate from the neural tube into and past the somites before populating the sensory and sympathetic ganglia. D. Distinct classes of neurons are generated at different dorsoventral positions in the embryonic spinal cord. Ventral

interneurons (V0–V3) and motor neu

rons (MN) differentiate from progenitor domains in the ventral spinal cord. Six classes of early dorsal interneurons (D1 – D6) develop in the dorsal half of the spinal cord. (Adapted from Goulding et al. 2002.)

<!-- image -->

induces ventral neurons, and signals from ectoderm

induce the roof plate, which induces dorsal neurons.

This strategy ensures that inductive signals are posi-

tioned appropriately to control neural cell fate and pattern over a prolonged period of development, as tissues grow and cells move. The Ventral Neural Tube Is Patterned by Sonic

Hedgehog Protein Secreted from the Notochord and

Floor Plate

## Within the ventral half of the neural tube, the identity and position of developing motor neurons and local

interneurons depend on the inductive activity of the

Shh protein, which is secreted by the notochord and subsequently by the floor plate. Shh is a member of a family of secreted proteins related to the Drosophila hedgehog protein, which had been discovered earlier and shown to control many aspects of embryonic development. Shh signaling is necessary for the induction of each of the neuronal classes generated in the ventral half of the spinal cord. How can a single inductive

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1117

V2

MN

signal specify the fate of at least half a dozen neuronal

classes? The answer lies in the ability of Shh to act as a

morphogen—a signal that can direct different cell fates

at different concentration thresholds. The secretion of Shh from the notochord and floor plate establishes a ventral-to-dorsal gradient of Shh protein activity in the ventral neural tube, such that progenitor cells occupying different dorsoventral positions within the neural epithelium are exposed to small (two- to three-fold) differences in ambient Shh signaling activity. Different levels of Shh signaling activity direct progenitor cells in different ventral domains to differentiation as motor neurons and interneurons (Figure 45–9A). These findings raise two additional questions. How is the spread of Shh protein within the ventral neural epithelium controlled in such a precise manner?

And how are small differences in Shh signaling activity converted into all-or-none decisions about the identity of progenitor cells in the ventral neural tube? Active Shh protein is synthesized from a larger precursor protein, cleaved through an unusual autocatalytic process that involves a serine protease-like

activity resident within the carboxy terminus of the precursor protein. Cleavage generates an amino

10/12/20 8:18 AM

A Neural plate Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System D Embryonic spinal cord Ectoderm D2

D3

D4

D5

D6

V0

V1



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Pax7 Dbx1 Dbx2 Irx 3 Pax6 


Pax7 Dbx1 Dbx2 Irx 3 Pax6

Pax6 Dbx2


<!-- image -->

A. A ventral-to-dorsal (V–D) gradient of sonic hedgehog (Shh)

signaling establishes dorsoventral domains of homeodomain protein expression in progenitor cells within the ventral half

Floor

plate

corresponding gradient of Gli transcription factor activity

B. Cross-repression between transcription factors induced

or repressed by Shh/Gli signaling specifies different neuronal classes. For example, Pax6 and Nkx2.2, and Dbx2 and Nkx6.1,

- -act in a cell-autonomous manner to repress each other's expression (inset), conferring cell identity to progenitor cells in an unambiguous manner. The sequential influence of graded Shh and Gli signaling, together with homeodomain transcriptional crossrepression, establishes five cardinal progenitor domains. C. The postmitotic neurons that emerge from these domains give rise to the five major classes of ventral neurons: the interneurons V0–V3 and motor neurons (MN).
- initiated by its interaction with a transmembrane recep-

of the neural tube. At each concentration, a different homeo domain transcription factor (Pax7, Dbx1, Dbx2, Irx3, or Pax6) is repressed, with Pax7 the most sensitive and Pax6 the least sensitive to repression. Other homeodomain transcription factors (Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2) are induced at different Shh levels. The homeodomain proteins that abut a common progenitor domain boundary have similar Shh concentration thresholds for repression and activation. Graded Shh signaling generates a terminal protein fragment that possesses all of the sign-

aling activity of Shh. During cleavage, the active amino

terminal fragment is modified covalently by the addi-

tion of a cholesterol molecule. Following Shh secretion, this lipophilic anchor tethers most of the protein to the surface of notochord and floor plate cells. Nevertheless, a small fraction of the anchored protein is released from the cell surface and transferred from cell to cell within the ventral neural epithelium. In reality, the molecular machinery that ensures the formation of a long-distance gradient of extracellular Shh protein is more complex, involving specialized transmembrane proteins that promote the release of Shh from the floor plate, as well as proteins that regulate Shh protein transfer between cells. How does the gradient of Shh protein within the ventral neural tube direct progenitor cells along different pathways of differentiation? Shh signaling is

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1118

tor complex that consists of a ligand-binding subunit

called patched and a signal-transducing subunit called

smoothened (named for the corresponding Drosophila genes). The binding of Shh to patched relieves its inhibition of smoothened and so activates an intracellular signaling pathway that involves several protein kinase enzymes, transport proteins, and most important, the Gli proteins, a class of zinc finger transcription factors. In the absence of Shh, the Gli proteins are proteolytically processed into transcriptional repressors that prevent the activation of Shh target genes. Activation

of the Shh signaling pathway inhibits this proteolytic processing, with the result that transcriptional activator forms of Gli predominate, thus directing the expression of Shh target genes. In this way, an extracellular gradient of Shh protein is converted into a nuclear gradient of Gli activator proteins. The ratio of

10/12/20 8:18 AM

p0 V0

V0

Gli repressor and activator proteins at different dors-

oventral positions determines which target genes are

activated.

What genes are activated by Shh-Gli signaling, and how do they participate in the specification of ventral neuronal subtypes? The major Gli targets are genes

encoding yet more transcription factors. One major class of Gli targets encodes homeodomain proteins, transcription factors that contain a conserved DNAbinding motif termed a homeobox. A second major class of target genes encodes proteins with a basic helixloop-helix DNA-binding motif. Some homeodomain and basic helix-loop-helix proteins are repressed and others activated by Shh signaling, each at a particular concentration threshold. In this way, cells in the ventral neural tube are allocated to one of five cardinal progenitor domains, each marked by its own transcription factor profile (Figure 45–9B,C). The transcription factors that define adjacent progenitor domains repress each other's expression. Thus, although a cell may initially express several

transcription factors that could direct the cell along different pathways of differentiation, a minor imbalance in the starting concentration of the two factors is rapidly amplified through repression, and only one of these proteins is stably expressed. This winner-takeall strategy of transcriptional repression sharpens the boundaries of progenitor domains and ensures that an initial gradient of Shh and Gli activity will resolve itself into clear distinctions in transcription factor profile. The transcription factors that specify a ventral progenitor domain then direct the expression of downstream genes that commit progenitor cells to a particular postmitotic neuronal identity. Thus, studies of Shh signaling have not only revealed the logic of ventral neuronal patterning but also demonstrated that the fate of a neuron is determined in part by the actions of transcriptional repressors rather than activators. This principle operates in many other tissues and organisms. Although originally studied in the context of neural development, defects in Shh signaling have now been implicated in a wide variety of human diseases. Muta-

tions in human Shh pathway genes result in defects in the development of ventral forebrain structures (holoprosencephaly), as well as neurological defects such as spina bifida, limb deformities, and certain cancers. The Dorsal Neural Tube Is Patterned by Bone Morphogenetic Proteins

## A signaling strategy based on graded morphogen levels activating sets of transcriptional programs has also

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1119

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System


been found to determine the patterning of cell types

in the dorsal spinal cord. The differentiation of roof

plate cells at the dorsal midline of the neural tube is

triggered by BMP signals from epidermal cells that initially border the neural plate and later flank the dorsal neural tube. After the neural tube has closed, roof plate cells themselves begin to express BMP as well as Wnt proteins. Wnt proteins promote the proliferation of pro-

genitor cells in the dorsal neural tube. BMP proteins induce the differentiation of neural crest cells at the very dorsal margin of the neural tube and later induce generation of diverse populations of sensory relay neurons that settle in the dorsal spinal cord. Dorsoventral Patterning Mechanisms Are Conserved Along the Rostrocaudal Extent

of the Neural Tube

## The strategies used to establish dorsoventral pattern in the spinal cord also control cell identity and pattern

along the dorsoventral axis of the hindbrain and mid-

brain, as well as throughout much of the forebrain. In the mesencephalic region of the neural tube, Shh signals from the floor plate act in concert with the rostrocaudal patterning signals discussed earlier to spec-

ify dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area as well as serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei (see Figure 45–5C). In the forebrain, Shh signals from the ventral midline and BMP signals from the dorsal midline act in combination to estab -lish different regional domains. Shh signaling from the ventral midline sets up early progenitor domains that later produce neurons of the basal ganglia and some cortical interneurons, whereas BMP signaling from the dorsal midline is involved in establishing early neocortical character. Local Signals Determine Functional

Subclasses of Neurons

## To this point, we have seen how a uniform group of neural precursor cells, the neural plate, is progres-

sively partitioned into discrete rostrocaudal and dor-

soventral domains within the neural tube, largely by morphogen-dependent differential expression of different sets of transcriptional regulators. The next question is how cells within these domains go on to generate the extraordinary diversity of neuronal types that characterize the vertebrate central nervous system. We address that question by focusing on development of the motor neuron.

10/12/20 8:18 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Motor neurons can be distinguished from all other

classes of neurons in the central nervous system by the

simple fact that they have axons that extend into the

periphery. Viewed in this light, motor neurons represent a coherent and distinct class. But motor neuron types can be distinguished by their position within the central nervous system as well as by the target cells they innervate. The primary job of most motor neurons is to innervate skeletal muscles, of which there are approximately 600 in a typical mammal. From this, it follows that there must be an equal number of motor neuron types. In this section, we discuss the developmental mechanisms that direct the differentiation of these different functional subclasses. The details of motor

neuron development are also important for understanding the basis of neurological disorders that affect these neurons, including spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig disease). In both diseases, some motor neuron types are highly vulnerable whereas others are relatively resilient. Similar principles drive the diversification of other neuronal classes into distinct types. Rostrocaudal Position Is a Major Determinant of Motor Neuron Subtype

## Motor neurons are generated along much of the rostrocaudal axis of the neural tube, from the midbrain to the spinal cord. Distinct motor neuron types develop

at each rostrocaudal level (Figure 45–10), suggesting that one goal of the patterning signals that establish rostrocaudal positional identity within the neural tube is to make motor neurons different. One major class of genes involved in specifying motor neuron types is the Hox gene family. Their name reflects the fact that they were the first transcription fac-

tors found that contain a homeodomain, a DNA binding domain now known to be present in many transcription factors that regulate developmental processes in organisms as diverse as yeast, plants, and mammals. For example, the Otx and Gbx genes discussed above contain homeodomains. The mammalian Hox gene family is especially large, containing 39 genes organized in four chromosomal clusters. These genes derive from an ancestral Hox complex that also gave rise to the HOM-C gene complex in Drosophila, where they were initially discovered and analyzed (Figure 45–11). Members of the vertebrate Hox gene family are expressed in overlapping domains along the rostrocaudal axis of the developing midbrain, hindbrain, and

spinal cord. As in Drosophila, the position of an individual Hox gene within its cluster predicts its rostrocaudal domain of expression within the neural tube. In most

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1120

but not all cases, Hox genes located at more 3

′

positions

within the chromosomal cluster are expressed in more

rostral domains, within the midbrain and hindbrain,

whereas genes at more 5 ′ positions are expressed in progressively more caudal positions within the spinal cord (Figures 45–10 and 45–11). This spatial array of Hox gene expression determines many aspects of neuronal diversity. Genetic studies, mostly in mice, have revealed how Hox genes control motor neuron identity in the hindbrain and spinal cord. We saw above that Hox

genes contribute to formation of the rhombomeres, the fundamental cellular building blocks of the hindbrain. Later, the same genes help to determine the identity of motor neurons within rhombomeres. For example, Hoxb1 is expressed at high levels in rhombomere 4, the domain that gives rise to facial motor neurons, but is absent from rhombomere 2, the domain that gives rise to trigeminal motor neurons (Figure 45–10). In the mouse, mutations that eliminate the activity of Hoxb1 change the fate of cells in rhombomere 4; there is a switch in the identity and connectivity of the

motor neurons that emerge from this domain. In the absence of Hoxb1 function, cells in rhombomere 4 generate motor neurons that innervate trigeminal rather than facial targets, that is, the motor neuron subtype normally generated within rhombomere 2 (Figure 45–12). Many additional studies have confirmed the general principle that motor neuron identity in the hindbrain is controlled by the spatial distribution of Hox gene expression. The control of spinal motor neuron identity is more complicated. Spinal motor neurons are clustered within longitudinal columns that occupy discrete

segmental positions, in register with their peripheral targets. Motor neurons that innervate forelimb and hindlimb muscles are found in the lateral motor col -umns at cervical and lumbar levels of the spinal cord, respectively. In contrast, motor neurons that innervate sympathetic neuronal targets are found within the preganglionic motor column at thoracic levels of the spinal cord. Within the lateral motor columns, motor neurons that innervate a single limb muscle are clustered together into discrete groups, termed motor pools . Because each limb in higher vertebrates contains more than 50 different muscle groups, a corresponding number of motor pools are required. The identity of motor neurons in the spinal cord is controlled by the coordinate activity of Hox genes found at more 5 ′ positions within the chromosomal

Hox clusters. For example, the spatial domains of expression and activity of Hox6 and Hox9 proteins establish the identities of motor neurons in the

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Figure 45–10 The anteroposterior profile of

Hox gene expression determines the subtype

of motor neurons in the hindbrain and spinal

cord. Different Hox proteins are expressed in discrete but partially overlapping rostrocaudal domains of the hindbrain and spinal cord. The position of Hox genes on the four mammalian chromosomal clusters roughly corresponds to their domain of expression along the anteroposterior axis of the neural tube. At hindbrain levels, motor neurons sending axons into cranial nerves V (trigeminal), VII (facial), IX (glossopharyngeal), and X (vagus) are depicted. These cranial motor nerves project to peripheral

targets in the branchial arches b1–b3. The hindbrain rhombomeres (r1–r8) and Hox profiles are shown on the left. At spinal levels, motor neurons that send axons to the forelimb and hind limb are contained within the lateral motor columns (LMC), located at bra -chial and lumbar levels of the spinal cord, respec-

tively. Preganglionic autonomic motor neurons (PGC) destined to innervate sympathetic ganglion targets are generated at thoracic levels. (Adapted, with permission, from Kiecker and Lumsden 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)

brachial lateral motor column and the preganglionic r1

<!-- image -->

motor column. Hox6 proteins specify brachial lat-


Face, cornea,

mouth

Face

Parotid gland

Soft palate,

pharynx

Forelimb

Sympathetic

neurons

Hind limb

Local Signals and Transcriptional Circuits Further

Diversify Motor Neuron Subtypes

eral motor column identity, whereas Hox9 proteins

specify preganglionic motor column identity. Motor neurons at the boundary of the forelimb and thoracic regions acquire an unambiguous columnar identity because the Hox6 and Hox9 proteins are mutually repressive (Figure 45–13A), similar to the transcriptional cross-repression that occurs in the dorsoventral patterning of the spinal cord.

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1121

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System

Anterior

## How do motor neurons within the lateral motor col -umns develop more refined identities, directing their

axons to specific limb muscles? Once again, Hox genes

control this stage of motor neuron diversification. We illustrate this function of Hox proteins by considering the pathway that generates the distinct divisional and pool identities of neurons within the brachial lateral

10/12/20 8:18 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Drosophila

A

P

<!-- image -->

chromosomal arrangement of Hox genes in the mouse and

HOM-C genes in Drosophila. Insects have one ancestral Hox gene cluster, whereas higher vertebrates such as birds and mammals have four duplicate Hox gene clusters. The position motor column that innervate the muscles of the fore limb (Figure 45–13A).

-

Repressive interactions between Hox proteins

expressed by the neurons in different lateral motor columns ensure that neurons that populate different

motor pools express distinct profiles of Hox protein expression. These Hox profiles direct the expression of downstream transcription factors as well as the axonal surface receptors that enable motor axons to respond to local cues within the limb that guide them to specific muscle targets. For example, the expression of Hox6 proteins activates a retinoic acid signaling pathway that directs the expression of two homeodomain transcription factors, Is11 and Lhx1. These factors in turn assign motor neurons to two divisional classes and determine the pattern of expression of the ephrin receptors that guide motor axons in the limb. The axons of motor neurons in these two divisions

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1122

a13

c12 c13

d12 d13

of a given Hox or HOM-C gene on the chromosomal cluster is

typically related to the position on the anteroposterior body axis

where the gene is expressed. (Adapted, with permission, from

Wolpert et al. 1998. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) project into the ventral and dorsal halves of the limb

mesenchyme under the control of ephrin signaling

(Figure 45–14).

Not all motor neuron columns are determined by Hox protein activity, however. The median motor column is generated at all segmental levels of the spinal

cord in register with axial muscles. Development of median motor column cells is controlled by Wnt4/5 signals secreted from the ventral midline of the spinal cord and by the expression of the homeodomain proteins Lhx3 and Lhx4, which render neurons in this column immune to the segmental patterning actions of Hox proteins. Thus, in both the hindbrain and spinal cord, the point-to-point connectivity of motor neurons with specific muscles emerges through tightly orchestrated

programs of homeodomain protein expression and activity. In vertebrates, these genes have evolved to

10/12/20 8:18 AM


′

Figure 45–12 The mouse Hoxb1 gene

controls the identity and projection

of hindbrain motor neurons. Hoxb1

is normally expressed at highest levels by cells in rhombomere r4. In wild-type mice, trigeminal motor neurons are generated in rhombomere r2, and their cell bodies migrate laterally before projecting their axons out of the hindbrain at the r2 level. In contrast, the cell bodies of facial motor neurons generated in rhombomere r4 migrate caudally yet project their axons out of the hindbrain at the r4 level. In mouse Hoxb1 mutants, motor neurons generated in rhombomere r4 migrate laterally instead of caudally, acquiring the features of r2 level trigeminal motor neurons. Ellipses indicate axonal exit points. (Adapted, with permission, from Struder et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 Springer Nature.)

direct neuron subtype and connectivity as well the

basic body plan.

The Developing Forebrain Is Patterned by

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Influences

## Neurons in the mammalian forebrain form circuits that mediate emotional behaviors, perception, and

cognition and participate in the storage and retrieval

of memories. Much like the hindbrain, the embryonic forebrain is initially divided along its rostrocaudal axis into transversely organized domains called prosomeres. Prosomeres 1 to 3 develop into the caudal part of the diencephalon, from which the thalamus emerges. Prosomeres 4 to 6 give rise to the rostral diencephalon and telencephalon. The ventral region of the rostral diencephalon gives rise to the hypothalamus and basal ganglia, whereas the telencephalon gives rise to the neocortex and hippocampus. Inductive Signals and Transcription Factor Gradients Establish Regional Differentiation

## Finally, we turn to the patterning of the neocortex itself, asking whether the developmental mechanisms and principles that govern the development of other

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1123

Wild type Trigeminal Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System Hoxb1 mutant Trigeminal motor r2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

r4


r2

r2

r4

regions of the central nervous system also control the

emergence of cortical areas specialized for particular

sensory, motor, and cognitive functions.

From the time of Brodmann's classical anatomi -cal description at the beginning of the 20th century, we have known that the cerebral cortex is subdivided

-

into many different areas. Recent studies of cortical development have begun to provide insight into the signaling mechanisms that establish somatosensory, auditory, and visual areas. There is now evidence for the existence of a corti cal "protomap," a basic plan in which different cortical areas are established early in development before

inputs from other brain regions can influence development. This view is supported by studies of transcription factor expression in the developing neocortex. Two homeodomain transcription factors, Pax6 and Emx2, are expressed in complementary anteroposterior gradients in the ventricular zone of the developing neocortex—high levels of Pax6 at anterior levels and high levels of Emx2 at posterior levels. These early patterns are established in part by a local rostral source of FGF signals, which promote Pax6 and repress Emx2 expression (Figure 45–15A). As is the case in the hindbrain, the distinct spatial domains of expression of Pax6 and Emx2 are sharpened by cross-repressive interactions between the two transcription factors.

10/12/20 8:18 AM


A

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Rostral

Hox9

Hox6

A. Hox6, Hox9, and Hox10 proteins are expressed in motor neurons at distinct rostrocaudal levels of the spinal cord and direct motor neuron identity and peripheral target connectiv-

<!-- image -->

ity. Hox6 activities control the identity of cells in the brachial lateral motor column (LMC), Hox9 controls the identity of cells in the preganglionic column (PGC), and Hox10 controls the identity of cells in the lumbar column (LMC). Cross-repressive interactions between Hox6, Hox9, and Hox10 proteins refine Hox profiles, and Hox activator functions define LMC and PGC identities. A more complex Hox transcriptional network controls motor pool identity and connectivity. Hox genes determine the rostrocaudal position of motor pools within the LMC. Hoxc8 is required in caudal LMC neurons to generate the motor pools The spatial distribution of Pax6 and Emx2 helps to

establish the initial regional pattern of the neocortex.

In mice lacking Emx2 activity, there is an expansion

of rostral neocortex—the motor and somatosensory areas—at the expense of the more caudal auditory and visual areas. Conversely, in mice lacking Pax6 activity, visual and auditory areas are expanded at the expense of motor and somatosensory areas (Figure 45–15B). Thus, as in the spinal cord, hindbrain, and midbrain, early neocortical patterns are established through the interplay between local inductive signals

and gradients of transcription factor expression. How

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1124

FCU

FCU

Pec

respectively. The patterns of Hox expression in the Pec and

FCU pools are established through a transcriptional network that appears to be driven largely by Hox cross-repressive interactions. B. Changing the Hox code within motor pools changes the pattern of muscle connectivity. Alterations in the profile of Hox6 expression determine the expression of Pea3 and Scip

and control the projection of motor axons to the Pec or FCU muscles. RNA interference (RNAi) knock-down of Hox6 suppresses innervation of the Pec muscle so that motor axons innervate the FCU muscle only. Ectopic expression of Hoxc6 driven by a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter represses connectivity with FCU, so that motor axons innervate only the Pec muscle. these gradients specify discrete functional areas in the

neocortex remains unclear. Unlike segmentation in

the hindbrain, where transcription factors precisely

specify rhombomeres, transcriptional markers of individual neocortical areas have not yet been identified. Afferent Inputs Also Contribute to Regionalization

In the adult neocortex, different functional areas can

## be distinguished by differences in the layering pattern of neurons—the cytoarchitecture of the areas—and by

their neuronal connections. One striking instance of

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Figure 45–14 The axons of lateral motor

column neurons are guided into the limb by

ephrin class tyrosine kinase receptors.  Motor

neurons in the medial and lateral divisions of the lateral motor column (LMC) project axons into the ventral and dorsal halves of the limb mesen -chyme, respectively. The profile of expression of LIM class homeodomain proteins regulates this dorsoventral projection. The LIM homeodomain protein Isl1 expressed by medial LMC neurons directs a high level of expression of EphB receptors, such that as the axons of these cells enter the limb, they are prevented from projecting dorsally by the high level of repellant ephrin B ligands expressed by cells of the dorsal limb mesenchyme. These axons therefore project into the ventral limb mesenchyme. Conversely, the LIM homeodomain protein Lhx1 expressed by lateral LMC neurons directs a high level of expression of EphA receptors, such that as the axons of these cells enter the limb, they are prevented from projecting ventrally by the high level of repellant ephrin A ligands expressed by cells of the ventral limb mesenchyme. These axons therefore project into the dorsal limb mesenchyme. Eph and ephrin signaling is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 47. (Abbreviation: MMC, medial motor column.)

regional distinctiveness in cell pattern is a grid-like

array of neurons and glial cells termed "barrels" in the

primary somatosensory cortex of rodents. Each corti-

cal barrel receives somatosensory information from a single whisker on the snout, and the regular array of cortical barrels reflects the somatotopic organization of afferent information from the body surface,

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1125

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System

LMC(m)

LMC(l)

<!-- image -->

Ephrin B

Ephrin B

Ephrin B


Isl1, Isl2

Isl2, Lhx1

Isl1, Isl2,

Lhx3, Lhx4

Collapse EphA

Ephrin A

Ephrin A

Ephrin A

culminating in the projection of thalamic efferents to

specific cortical barrels (Figure 45–16A).

Cortical barrels are evident soon after birth, and

their development depends on a critical period of afferent input from the periphery; their formation is

disrupted if the whisker field in the skin is eliminated during this critical period. Strikingly, if prospective

10/12/20 8:18 AM


A


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior


FGF8 Anteromedial Pax6

areas along the anteroposterior axis of the developing


forebrain.  (Adapted from Hamasaki et al. 2004.) A. (1) FGF8 signals from the anteromedial telencephalon establish the rostrocaudal pattern of the cerebral cortex. (2) A top-down view of the developing cerebral cortex in the mouse shows inverse rostrocaudal gradients of the transcription

<!-- image -->

visual cortical tissue is transplanted into the soma-

tosensory cortex around the time of birth, barrels

form in the transplanted tissue with a pattern that

closely resembles that of the normal somatosensory barrel field (Figure 45–16B). Together, these findings demonstrate that afferent input superimposes aspects of neocortical patterning on the basic features of the protomap. The nature of the input to different cortical areas influences neural function as well as cytoarchitecture. This can be shown by monitoring physiological and

behavioral responses after rerouting afferent pathways of one sensory modality to a region of neocortex that

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1126

Rostral

Caudal

B. Different functional areas develop at different rostrocaudal posi-

tions. Motor areas develop in the anterior region (M) and visual areas in more posterior regions (V). Genetic elimination of Emx2

function results in expansion of the motor areas and contraction in auditory (A) and visual areas. Conversely, elimination of Pax6 function results in an expansion of the visual areas and a contraction of motor and auditory areas. (Abbreviation: S, somatosensory areas.) normally processes a different modality. In animals

in which retinal inputs are rerouted into the auditory

pathway, the primary auditory cortex contains a sys-

tematic representation of visual space rather than of sound frequency (Figure 45–17). When these animals are trained to discriminate a visual from an auditory cue, they perceive a cue as visual when the rewired auditory cortex is activated by vision. Thus, brain pathways and neocortical regions are established through genetic programs during early development but later depend on afferent inputs for their

specialized anatomical, physiological, and behavioral functions.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Emx2
A


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior


FGF8 Anteromedial Pax6

areas along the anteroposterior axis of the developing


forebrain.  (Adapted from Hamasaki et al. 2004.) A. (1) FGF8 signals from the anteromedial telencephalon establish the rostrocaudal pattern of the cerebral cortex. (2) A top-down view of the developing cerebral cortex in the mouse shows inverse rostrocaudal gradients of the transcription

<!-- image -->

visual cortical tissue is transplanted into the soma-

tosensory cortex around the time of birth, barrels

form in the transplanted tissue with a pattern that

closely resembles that of the normal somatosensory barrel field (Figure 45–16B). Together, these findings demonstrate that afferent input superimposes aspects of neocortical patterning on the basic features of the protomap. The nature of the input to different cortical areas influences neural function as well as cytoarchitecture. This can be shown by monitoring physiological and

behavioral responses after rerouting afferent pathways of one sensory modality to a region of neocortex that

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1126

Rostral

Caudal

B. Different functional areas develop at different rostrocaudal posi-

tions. Motor areas develop in the anterior region (M) and visual areas in more posterior regions (V). Genetic elimination of Emx2

function results in expansion of the motor areas and contraction in auditory (A) and visual areas. Conversely, elimination of Pax6 function results in an expansion of the visual areas and a contraction of motor and auditory areas. (Abbreviation: S, somatosensory areas.) normally processes a different modality. In animals

in which retinal inputs are rerouted into the auditory

pathway, the primary auditory cortex contains a sys-

tematic representation of visual space rather than of sound frequency (Figure 45–17). When these animals are trained to discriminate a visual from an auditory cue, they perceive a cue as visual when the rewired auditory cortex is activated by vision. Thus, brain pathways and neocortical regions are established through genetic programs during early development but later depend on afferent inputs for their

specialized anatomical, physiological, and behavioral functions.

10/12/20 8:18 AM

Emx2

Figure 45–16 Sensory input regu-

lates the organization of "barrels"

in the developing somatosensory

cortex in rodents. (Adapted from Schlaggar and O'Leary 1991.) A. The barrel area of the rodent somatosensory cortex forms a somatotopic representation of the rows of

whiskers on the animal's snout. Simi

lar representations of the whisker field are present upstream—in the brain stem and in the thalamic nuclei that relay somatosensory inputs from the face to the cortex. B. A barrel-like cellular organization is induced in developing visual cortex tissue that was grafted at an early

postnatal stage into the somatosensory cortex.

A

<!-- image -->

A Reorganization of thalamic pathways

Normal Visual cortex (V1)

Inferior

colliculus

## Auditory cortex (A1)

<!-- image -->

mission, from Sharma, Angelucci, and Sur 2000. Copyright ©

2000 Springer Nature.) A. The visual pathway consists of afferent fibers from the retina that innervate the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and superior colliculus. Axons from the LGN project to the primary visual cortex

(V1). The auditory pathway projects from the cochlear nucleus (not shown) to the inferior colliculus, and then to the medial geniculate

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1127

B Orientation maps

- Normal V1

<!-- image -->

Rewired A1 Ablated

<!-- image -->

nucleus (MGN) and on to the primary auditory cortex (A1).

Ablating the inferior colliculus in neonatal ferrets causes retinal

afferents to innervate the MGN. As a consequence, the auditory

cortex is reprogrammed to process visual information. B. Visual orientation maps similar to those seen in normal V1 cortex are observed in rewired A1 auditory cortex of ferrets using optical imaging of intrinsic signals. The different colors represent

different receptor field orientations (see bars at right). The pattern of activity in rewired A1 resembles that of normal V1.

10/12/20 8:19 AM

Transplant into

somatosensory cortex

Maturation


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Highlights

1.

The early vertebrate embryo consists of three

layers of cells—ectoderm, mesoderm, and endo-

derm. The entire nervous system arises from the

- ectoderm, and more specifically from a central strip of ectoderm called the neural plate. 2. Formation of neural plate within the ectoderm occurs by a process called induction, in which underlying mesodermal cells secrete soluble fac-
- tors that induce a neural program of gene expression in neighboring ectodermal cells. Induction involves a "de-repression" mechanism in which mesoderm-derived soluble factors prevent ectoderm-derived bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs; members of the transforming growth factor β family) from suppressing the neural fate. 3. Following induction, the neural plate invaginates from the ectoderm to form a neural tube. The tube gives rise to the central nervous system, while

7.

different transcription factors by cells in these

regions.

Still later, further subdivisions form segments

- called prosomeres in the forebrain and rhombomeres in the hindbrain, with differential
- expression of transcription factors leading to generation of distinct neural types in each. 8. In both the hindbrain and the spinal cord, motor neurons acquire distinct properties according to their anterior-posterior position, differentiating
- into the groups that innervate distinct muscles. Differential expression of transcription factors called Hox proteins is particularly important in diversification of motor neurons. They act with other transcription and soluble factors to divide motor neurons into columns and pools, with each pool destined to innervate a specific muscle. 9. The neural tube is also patterned along the dorsoventral axis. Similar to anterior-posterior regionalization, patterning results from gradi-
- cells at the border between neural tube and ecto derm form neural crest, which migrates through the embryo to form the sensory and autonomic ganglia of the peripheral nervous system. 4. As soon as the neural tube forms, it begins to become regionalized. Regionalization along the anterior-posterior axis leads to a series of subdi-
- visions. The anterior region becomes the brain, and the posterior region becomes the spinal cord. Divisions of the prospective brain generate the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. The forebrain divides further to form the telencephalon, from which cortex, hippocampus, and basal ganglia arise; and the diencephalon, which gives rise to thalamus, hypothalamus, and retina. The hindbrain divides to form the pons and cerebellum anteriorly and the medulla posteriorly. 5. Anterior-posterior patterning is established by gradients of Wnt signaling, which arise from selective production of Wnts posteriorly
- -ents of morphogens. The most important are sonic hedgehog (Shh), which forms a ventral high– dorsal low gradient, and BMPs, which form a dorsal high–ventral low gradient. Different levels of Shh and BMPs induce different transcription factors, which in turn lead to generation of different cell types. 10. Regionalization of the cerebral cortex into motor, sensory, and association areas also begins with gradients of morphogens that induce differen-
- tial expression of transcription factors, leading to establishment of a "protomap" of area identity. Interactions among areas along with input from subcortical regions refine the protomap to form definitive cortical areas. 11. Several general principles explain many aspects of early neural development: (a) Inductive interactions lead to subdivision of a uniform set of
- and selective production of Wnt inhibitors anteriorly. 6. Subdivisions along the anteroposterior axis are established by groups of cells called organizing centers at defined positions within the neural
- tube. The organizing centers secrete factors that pattern neighboring regions of the neural tube and specify neuronal types within them. For example, the isthmic organizer at the boundary of the hindbrain and midbrain secretes Wnts and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). They act differentially in anterior and posterior regions because the earlier patterning events led to expression of

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1128

- cells into discrete areas. (b) A small set of soluble factors such as FGFs, BMPs, and Wnts are used multiple times at multiple stages to regionalize the nervous system. (c) Varying levels of these factors lead to expression of different transcription factors, which in turn generate different neural cell types. (d) Repressive interactions between cells expressing different transcription factors sharpen boundaries along both anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes. 12. Until recently, studies on early stages of neural development have been restricted to experimental animals. Recent advances now enable neuro

-

- scientists to recapitulate some of these processes using cultured human cells. It should therefore

10/12/20 8:19 AM

soon be possible to learn whether there are criti-

cal early differences between humans and other

species that contribute to the complexity of the

human brain and to human brain disorders.

Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System


Hamasaki T, Leingartner A, Ringstedt T, O'Leary DD. 2004.

EMX2 regulates sizes and positioning of the primary sen-

sory and motor areas in neocortex by direct specification

- of cortical progenitors. Neuron 43:359–372. Horng S, Sur M. 2006. Visual activity and cortical rewiring: activity-dependent plasticity of cortical networks. Prog Brain Res 157:3–11.
- Joshua R. Sanes Ille F, Atanasoski S, Falkm S, et al. 2007. Wnt/BMP signal integration regulates the balance between proliferation and differentiation of neuroepithelial cells in the dorsal
- Thomas M. Jessell spinal cord. Dev Biol 304:394–408. Kiecker C, Lumsden A. 2005. Compartments and their boundaries in vertebrate brain development. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:553–564.
- Levine AJ, Brivanlou AH. 2007. Proposal of a model of mammalian neural induction. Dev Biol 308:247–256. Lim Y, Golden JA. 2007. Patterning the developing dienceph-
- alon. Brain Res Rev 53:17–26. Liu A, Niswander LA. 2005. Bone morphogenetic protein
- signalling and vertebrate nervous system development. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:945–954.
- Lupo G, Harris WA, Lewis KE. 2006. Mechanisms of ventral patterning in the vertebrate nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:103–114.
- Mallamaci A, Stoykova A. 2006. Gene networks controlling early cerebral cortex arealization. Eur J Neurosci 23:847–856. Nordstrom U, Maier E, Jessell TM, Edlund T. 2006. An early
- role for WNT signaling in specifying neural patterns of Cdx and Hox gene expression and motor neuron subtype
- identity. PLoS Biol 4:1438–1452. Rash BG, Grove EA. 2006. Area and layer patterning in the developing cerebral cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 16:25–34. Schlaggar BL, O'Leary DDM. 1991. Potential of visual cortex
- to develop an array of functional units unique to somatosensory cortex. Science 252:1556–1560.
- Sharma J, Angelucci A, Sur M. 2000. Induction of visual orientation modules in auditory cortex. Nature 404:841–847. Song MR, Pfaff SL. 2005. Hox genes: the instructors working
- at motor pools. Cell 123:363–365. Stamataki D, Ulloa F, Tsoni SV, Mynett A, Briscoe J. 2005. A
- gradient of Gli activity mediates graded Sonic Hedgehog signaling in the neural tube. Genes Dev 19:626–641.

.

- Struder M, Lumsden A, Ariza-McNaughton L, Bradley A, Krumlauf R. 1996. Altered segmental identity and abnormal migration of motor neurons in mice lacking Hoxb-1
- Nature 384:630–634. von Melchner L, Pallas SL, Sur M. 2000. Visual behaviour mediated by retinal projections directed to the auditory pathway. Nature 404:871–876.
- Wolpert L, Beddington R, Brockes J, Jessell TM, Lawrence PA, Meyerowitz E. 1998. Principles of Development. New York: Oxford Univ Press.
- Wolpert L, Smith J, Jessell T, Lawrence P, Robertson E, Meyerowitz E. 2006. Principles of Development, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Wurst W, Bally-Cuif L. 2001. Neural plate patterning: upstream and downstream of the isthmic organizer. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:99–108.

10/12/20 8:19 AM

Selected Reading

Anderson C, Stern CD. 2016. Organizers in development.

Curr Top Dev Biol 117:435–454.

Catela C, Shin MM, Dasen JS. 2015. Assembly and function

- of spinal circuits for motor control. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31:669–698.
- Dessaud E, McMahon AP, Briscoe J. 2008. Pattern formation in the vertebrate neural tube: a sonic hedgehog morphogenregulated transcriptional network. Development 135:
- 2489–2503. Goulding M. 2009. Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: moving in a new direction. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:507–518. Hamburger V. 1988. The Heritage of Experimental Embryology. Hans
- Spemann and the Organizer. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Kiecker C, Lumsden A. 2012. The role of organizers in pattern-
- ing the nervous system. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:347–367. Ozair MZ, Kintner C, Brivanlou AH. 2013. Neural induction
- and early patterning in vertebrates. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 2:479–498.
- Rakic P. 2002. Evolving concepts of cortical radial and areal specification. Prog Brain Res 136:265–280. Sur M, Rubenstein JL. 2005. Patterning and plasticity of the
- cerebral cortex. Science 310:805–810.
- References Addison M, Wilkinson DG. 2016. Segment identity and cell

segregation in the vertebrate hindbrain. Curr Top Dev

Biol 117:581–596.

- Bell E, Wingate RJ, Lumsden A. 1999. Homeotic transformation of rhombomere identity after localized Hoxb1 misexpression. Science 284:2168–2171.
- Cholfin JA, Rubenstein JL. 2007. Patterning of frontal cortex subdivisions by Fgf17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:7652–7657.
- Dasen JS. 2017. Master or servant? Emerging roles for motor neuron subtypes in the construction and evolution of locomotor circuits. Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:25–32.
- Dasen JS, Tice BC, Brenner-Morton S, Jessell TM. 2005. A Hox regulatory network establishes motor neuron pool identity and target-muscle connectivity. Cell 123:477–491.
- Goulding M, Lanuza G, Sapir T, Narayan S. 2002. The formation of sensorimotor circuits. Curr Opin Neurobiol 12:505–515.

Kandel-Ch45\_1101-1129.indd 1129


Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

The Proliferation of Neural Progenitor Cells Involves

Symmetric and Asymmetric Cell Divisions

Radial Glial Cells Serve as Neural Progenitors and

## Structural Scaffolds The Generation of Neurons and Glial Cells Is Regulated

## by Delta-Notch Signaling and Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors

The Layers of the Cerebral Cortex Are Established by Sequential Addition of Newborn Neurons Neurons Migrate Long Distances From Their Site of Origin to

## Their Final Position Excitatory Cortical Neurons Migrate Radially

## Along Glial Guides Cortical Interneurons Arise Subcortically and Migrate

Tangentially to Cortex Neural Crest Cell Migration in the Peripheral Nervous

System Does Not Rely on Scaffolding Structural and Molecular Innovations Underlie the Expansion

of the Human Cerebral Cortex Intrinsic Programs and Extrinsic Factors Determine the

## Neurotransmitter Phenotypes of Neurons Neurotransmitter Choice Is a Core Component of

## Transcriptional Programs of Neuronal Differentiation Signals From Synaptic Inputs and Targets Can Influence

the Transmitter Phenotypes of Neurons The Survival of a Neuron Is Regulated by Neurotrophic

Signals From the Neuron's Target The Neurotrophic Factor Hypothesis Was Confirmed by

## the Discovery of Nerve Growth Factor Neurotrophins Are the Best-Studied Neurotrophic Factors

Neurotrophic Factors Suppress a Latent Cell Death Program

Highlights

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1130


n the preceding chapter, we described how local

inductive signals pattern the neural tube and estab-

lish the early regional subdivisions of the nervous

system—the spinal cord, hindbrain, midbrain, and forebrain. Here, we turn to the issue of how progenitor cells within these regions differentiate into neurons and glial cells, the two major cell types of the nervous system. The mature brain comprises billions of nerve cells and a similar number of glial cells arranged in complex patterns, yet its precursor, the neural plate, initially contains only a few hundred cells arranged in a simple columnar epithelium. From this observation alone, it should be apparent that the generation of neural cells and their delivery to appropriate sites must be carefully regulated. We begin by discussing some of the molecules that specify neuronal and glial cell fates. The basic mechanisms of neurogenesis endow cells with common neu-

ronal properties, features that are largely independent of the region of the nervous system in which they are generated or the specific functions they perform. We also describe mechanisms by which developing neurons become specialized, for example by acquiring the machinery to synthesize specific neurotransmitters. We next discuss how neurons are delivered from their sites of origin to their final destinations. A common theme is that neurons are frequently "born"—that

is, become postmitotic—far from where they end up, for example, in the layers of the cerebral cortex or the ganglia of the peripheral nervous system. Such distances necessitate elaborate migratory mechanisms, which differ among neuronal types. After the identity and functional properties of the neuron have begun to emerge, additional

10/12/20 8:25 AM

developmental processes determine whether the neu-

ron will live or die. Remarkably, approximately half

of the neurons generated in the mammalian nervous

system are lost through programmed cell death. We examine the factors that regulate the survival of neurons and the possible benefits of widespread neuronal loss. Finally, we describe a core biochemical pathway in nerve cells destined for elimination. The Proliferation of Neural Progenitor

Cells Involves Symmetric and Asymmetric

Cell Divisions

## Histologists in the late 19th century showed that neural epithelial cells close to the ventricular lumen of the

embryonic brain exhibit features of mitosis. We now

know that the proliferative zones surrounding the ventricles are the major sites for the production of neural cells in the central nervous system. Moreover, newborn cells in the proliferative zones often become committed to neuronal or glial fates before migrating from these zones. At early stages of embryonic development, most progenitor cells in the ventricular zone of the neural tube proliferate rapidly. Many of these early neural

progenitors have the properties of stem cells: They can generate additional copies of themselves, a process called self-renewal, and also give rise to differentiated neurons and glial cells. In a later chapter, we will describe the more recent discovery that stem cells resembling those of embryos also exist in the adult brain and may be harnessed for therapeutic purposes (Chapter 50). As with other types of stem cells, neural progenitor cells undergo stereotyped programs of cell division. One mode of cell division is symmetric: Neural

stem cells divide to produce two stem cells, and in this way expand the population of proliferative progenitor cells. This mode predominates at the earliest times, as the neuroepithelium expands. A second mode is asymmetric: The progenitor produces one differentiated daughter and another daughter that retains its stem cell–like properties. This mode retains but does not amplify the stem cell population. A third mode leads to production of two differentiated daughters. In this symmetric mode, the stem cell population is depleted. All three modes have been found in the embryonic cerebral cortex in vivo and in cortical cells grown in tissue culture (Figure 46–1). The incidence of symmetric and asymmetric cell division is influenced by signals in the local environment of the dividing cell, making it possible to

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1131

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


control the probability of self-renewal or differentia-

tion. Environmental factors can influence the outcome

of progenitor cell divisions in two fundamental ways.

They can act in an "instructive" manner, biasing the outcome of the division process and causing the stem cell to adopt one fate at the expense of others. Or they can act in a "selective" manner, permitting the survival and maturation of only certain cell progeny. Radial Glial Cells Serve as Neural Progenitors

and Structural Scaffolds

## Radial glial cells are the earliest morphologically distinguishable cell type to appear within the primitive

neural epithelium. Their cell bodies are located in the

ventricular zone, and their long process extends to the pial surface. As the brain thickens, the processes of radial glial cells remain attached to the ventricular and pial surfaces. After the generation of neurons is complete, many radial glial cells differentiate into astrocytes. The elongated shape of the radial glial cell places it in a favorable position to serve as a scaffold for the migration of neurons that emerge from the ventricular zone (Figure 46–2). The ventricular zone was once thought to contain two major cell types: radial glial cells and a set of neuroepithelial progenitors that serve as the primary

source of neurons. More recently, this classical view has changed dramatically. Once symmetric divisions of stem cells have expanded the neuroepithelium, these cells give rise to radial glial cells. The radial glial cells serve as progenitor cells that generate both neurons and astrocytes in addition to their role in neuronal migration (Figure 46–2). Labeling of radial glial cells with fluorescent dyes or viruses shows that their clonal progeny include both neuronal and radial glial cells. These findings indicate that radial glial cells are able to undergo both asymmetric and self-renewing cell division and serve as a major source of postmitotic neurons as well as astrocytes. The Generation of Neurons and Glial Cells Is

Regulated by Delta-Notch Signaling and Basic

Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors

## How do radial glial cells make the decision to selfrenew, generate neurons, or give rise to mature

astrocytes? The answer to this question involves an

evolutionarily conserved signaling system. In flies and vertebrates, neural fate is regulated by a cell-surface signaling system, comprised of the

10/12/20 8:25 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Strategies of cell division Asymmetric Symmetric

<!-- image -->

A. Asymmetric and symmetric modes of cell division. A pro-

genitor cell (P) can undergo asymmetric division to generate a neuron (N) and a glial cell (G), or a neuron and another pro-

genitor. This mode of division contributes to the generation of neurons at early stages of development and of glial cells at later stages, typical of many regions of the central nervous system. Progenitor cells can also undergo symmetric division transmembrane ligand Delta and its receptor Notch.

This signaling system was revealed in genetic stud-

ies in Drosophila. Neurons emerge from within a

larger cluster of ectodermal cells, called a proneural region, all of which have the potential to generate neurons. Yet within the proneural region, only certain cells form neurons; the others become epidermal support cells.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1132

B. Time-lapse cinematography captures the divisions and dif-

ferentiation of isolated cortical progenitor cells in the rodent. Lineage diagrams illustrate cells that undergo predominantly

asymmetric division, giving rise to neurons, or symmetric division, giving rise to oligodendrocytes. (Adapted, with permission, from Qian et al. 1998. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) Delta and Notch are initially expressed at similar

levels by all proneural cells (Figure 46–3A). With time,

however, Notch activity is enhanced in one cell and

suppressed in its neighbor. The cell in which Notch activity is highest loses the potential to form a neuron and acquires an alternative fate. The binding of Delta to Notch results in proteolytic cleavage of the Notch cytoplasmic domain, which then enters the nucleus.

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Basal (pial) surface

<!-- image -->

fold for radial neuronal migration.  The nuclei of progenitor

cells in the ventricular zone of the developing cerebral cortex migrate along the apical-basal axis as they progress through the cell cycle. Left: During the G1 phase, the nuclei rise from the inner (apical) surface of the ventricular zone. During the

There, it functions as a transcription factor, regulating

the activity of a cascade of other transcription factors

of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family. The bHLH

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

Neuron

Radial

glial cell

(M) occurs when the nuclei reach the ventricular surface. Right:

During cell division, radial glial cells give rise to postmitotic neurons that migrate away from the ventricular zone using radial glial cells as a guide.

Hes5, appear to maintain radial glial cell character

by activating the expression of an ErbB class tyrosine

kinase receptor for neuregulin, a secreted signal that

transcription factors suppress the ability of the cell to become a neuron and reduce the level of expression of the ligand Delta (Figure 46–3B,C). The initial difference in Notch levels between cells may be small and in some cases stochastic (random). Through this feedback pathway, however, these initial

minor differences are amplified to generate all-or-none differences in the status of Notch activation and, con sequently, the fates of the two cells. This basic logic of Delta-Notch and bHLH signaling has been conserved in vertebrate and invertebrate neural tissues. How does Notch signaling regulate neuronal and glial production in mammals? At early stages in the development of the mammalian cortex, Notch sign-

-promotes radial glial cell identity. The Notch ligand Delta1 as well as neuregulin are expressed by newly generated cortical neurons; thus, the radial glial cells depend on feedback signals from their neuronal progeny for continued production. At later stages of cortical development, Notch signaling continues to activate Hes proteins, but a change in the intracellular response pathway results

aling promotes the generation of radial glial cells by activating members of the Hes family of bHLH transcriptional repressors. Two of these proteins, Hes1 and

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1133

in astrocyte differentiation. At this stage, the Hes proteins work by activating a transcription factor, STAT3, which recruits the serine-threonine kinase JAK2, a potent inducer of astrocyte differentiation. STAT3 also activates expression of astrocyte-specific genes such as the glial-fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). The generation of oligodendrocytes, the second major class of glial cells in the central nervous system, follows many of the principles that control neuron

10/12/20 8:25 AM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Figure 46–3 Delta binds the receptor Notch

and determines neuronal fate.

A. At the onset of the interaction between two

cells, Delta engages the receptor Notch. Delta and Notch are expressed at similar levels in each cell,

and thus their initial signaling strength is equal. B. A small imbalance in the strength of DeltaNotch signaling breaks the symmetry of the interaction. In this example, the left cell provides a

slightly greater Delta signal, thus activating Notch signaling in the right cell to a greater extent. On binding by Delta, the cytoplasmic domain of Notch is cleaved to form a proteolytic fragment called Notch-Intra, which enters the nucleus of the cell and initiates a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional cascade that regulates the level of Delta expression. Notch-Intra forms a transcriptional complex with a bHLH protein, suppressor of hairless, which binds to and activates the gene encoding a second bHLH protein, enhancer of split. Once activated, enhancer of split binds to and represses expression of the gene encoding a third bHLH protein, achaetescute. Achaete-scute activity promotes expression of Delta. Thus, by repressing achaete-scute, enhancer of split decreases transcriptional activation of the Delta gene and production of Delta protein. This diminishes the ability of the cell on the right to activate Notch signaling in the left cell. C. Once the level of Notch signaling in the left cell has been reduced, suppressor of hairless no longer activates enhancer of split, and the level

of expression of achaete-scute increases, resulting in enhanced expression of Delta and further activation of Notch signaling in the right cell. In this way, a small initial imbalance in Delta-Notch signaling is rapidly amplified into a marked asymmetry in the level of Notch activation in the two cells. In the mammalian central nervous system, cells with high levels of Notch activation are diverted from neuronal fates, whereas cells with low levels of Notch activation become neurons.

Suppressor of hairless

Enhancer of split

Achaete-scute

<!-- image -->

and astrocyte production (Figure 46–4). Notch signal- it determines the neuronal fate of daughter cells of

ing regulates the expression of two bHLH transcrip-

tion factors, Olig1 and Olig2, which have essential

roles in the production of embryonic and postnatal oligodendrocytes. Additional mechanisms exist to ensure that the effects of Notch signals are avoided in cells destined to become neurons. One involves a cytoplas-

mic protein called Numb. The key role of Numb in neurogenesis was first shown in Drosophila, where

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1134

asymmetrically dividing progenitors. In the mam-

malian cortex, Numb is preferentially localized in

neuronal daughters and antagonizes Notch signaling. Loss of Numb activity causes progenitor cells to proliferate extensively. The inhibition of Notch signaling results in the expression of several proneural bHLH transcription factors, notably Mash1, neurogenin-1, and neurogenin-2. Neurogenins promote neuronal production by activating downstream

10/12/20 8:25 AM

A

Delta

Notch Figure 46–4 Notch signaling regulates the fate of cells in the developing cerebral cortex.

Notch signaling has several roles in cell differentiation in the developing cerebral cortex. Activation of Notch signaling in glial progenitor cells results in differentiation of the cells as astrocytes and inhibits differentiation as oligodendrocytes (left pathway). Notch signaling also inhibits progenitor cells from differentiating into neurons (right pathway). (Photo of oligodendrocyte reproduced, with permission, from David H. Rowitch; photo of astrocyte reproduced, with permission, from SAASTA on behalf of photographers Edward Nyatia and Dirk Michael Lang; photo of neuron reproduced, with permission, from Masatoshi Takeichi.)

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

Stem cell

<!-- image -->

bHLH proteins such as neuroD, and they block the

formation of astrocytes by inhibiting JAK and STAT

signaling.

Although Delta-Notch signaling and bHLH transcription factor activators lie at the heart of the decision to produce neurons or glial cells, several additional

transcriptional pathways augment this core molecular program. One important transcription factor, REST/ NRSF, represses the expression of neuronal genes in neural progenitors and glial cells. REST/NRSF is rapidly degraded as neurons differentiate, permitting the expression of neurogenic bHLH factors and other neuronal genes. Homeodomain transcription factors of the SoxB class also play an important role in maintaining neural progenitors by blocking neurogenic bHLH protein activity. The differentiation of neurons therefore requires the avoidance of REST/NRSF and SoxB protein activity.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1135

Notch signal

The Layers of the Cerebral Cortex Are

Established by Sequential Addition of

Newborn Neurons

## The ventricular zone in the most anterior portion of the mammalian neural tube gives rise to the cerebral

cortex in a series of steps. Cells from the ventricular

zone, which is on the apical edge of the neuroepithelium, initially migrate basally to form a subventricular zone, which houses a set of progenitor cells with a more restricted set of fates. Next to form is an inter -mediate zone, through which newly formed neurons migrate, and a preplate, which houses the earliestborn neurons. Additional neurons migrate to form a layer called the cortical plate, which lies within the preplate. The cortical plate thereby divides the preplate into an apical subplate and a basal marginal zone (Figure 46–5A).

10/12/20 8:25 AM
Figure 46–4 Notch signaling

regulates the fate of cells in

the developing cerebral cortex.

Notch signaling has several roles in cell differentiation in the developing cerebral cortex. Activation of Notch signaling in glial progenitor cells results in differentiation of the cells as astrocytes and inhibits differentiation as oligodendrocytes (left pathway). Notch signaling also inhibits progenitor cells from differentiating into neurons (right pathway). (Photo of oligodendrocyte reproduced, with permission, from David H. Rowitch; photo of astrocyte reproduced, with permission, from SAASTA on behalf of photographers Edward Nyatia and Dirk Michael Lang; photo of neuron reproduced, with permission, from Masatoshi Takeichi.)

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

Stem cell

<!-- image -->

bHLH proteins such as neuroD, and they block the

formation of astrocytes by inhibiting JAK and STAT

signaling.

Although Delta-Notch signaling and bHLH transcription factor activators lie at the heart of the decision to produce neurons or glial cells, several additional

transcriptional pathways augment this core molecular program. One important transcription factor, REST/ NRSF, represses the expression of neuronal genes in neural progenitors and glial cells. REST/NRSF is rapidly degraded as neurons differentiate, permitting the expression of neurogenic bHLH factors and other neuronal genes. Homeodomain transcription factors of the SoxB class also play an important role in maintaining neural progenitors by blocking neurogenic bHLH protein activity. The differentiation of neurons therefore requires the avoidance of REST/NRSF and SoxB protein activity.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1135

Notch signal

The Layers of the Cerebral Cortex Are

Established by Sequential Addition of

Newborn Neurons

## The ventricular zone in the most anterior portion of the mammalian neural tube gives rise to the cerebral

cortex in a series of steps. Cells from the ventricular

zone, which is on the apical edge of the neuroepithelium, initially migrate basally to form a subventricular zone, which houses a set of progenitor cells with a more restricted set of fates. Next to form is an inter -mediate zone, through which newly formed neurons migrate, and a preplate, which houses the earliestborn neurons. Additional neurons migrate to form a layer called the cortical plate, which lies within the preplate. The cortical plate thereby divides the preplate into an apical subplate and a basal marginal zone (Figure 46–5A).

10/12/20 8:25 AM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Timeline of neuron generation MZ

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1136


II / III




SP

WM

SVZ

VZ

17.5

Last generated

Doublecortin mutant

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Once within the cortical plate, neurons become

organized into well-defined layers. The layer in which

a neuron settles is correlated precisely with the neu-

ron's birthday, a term that refers to the time at which a dividing precursor cell undergoes its final round of cell division and gives rise to a postmitotic neuron. Cells that migrate from the ventricular and subventricular zones and leave the cell cycle at early stages give rise to neurons that settle in the deepest layers of the cortex. Cells that exit the cell cycle at progressively later stages migrate over longer distances and pass earlierborn neurons before settling in more superficial layers of the cortex. Thus, the layering of neurons in the cerebral cortex follows an inside-first, outside-last rule (Figure 46–5B). Neurons Migrate Long Distances From Their Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


the ventricular surface and give rise to elongated fibers

that span the width of the developing cerebral wall.

Each radial glial cell has one basal end-foot at the api-

cal surface of the ventricular zone and processes that terminate in multiple end-feet at the pial surface (Figure 46–6). Radial glial scaffolds are especially important in the development of the primate cortex, where neurons are required to migrate over long distances as the cortex expands. A single radial glial cell scaffold can support the migration of up to 30 generations of cortical neurons before eventually differentiating into an astrocyte. What forces and molecules power neuronal migration on radial glial cells? After a neuron leaves the cell cycle, its leading process wraps around the shaft of the

Site of Origin to Their Final Position

## The migration of neurons from the cortical ventricular zone to the cortical plate follows a process termed

radial migration. In this mode, the neurons move along

the long unbranched processes of radial glial cells to reach their destinations. In contrast, interneurons enter the cortex from subcortical sites by a process called tangential migration. We discuss these modes in turn and then describe a third migratory strategy, free migration which predominates in the peripheral nervous system. Excitatory Cortical Neurons Migrate Radially Along Glial Guides

, radial glial cell and its nucleus translocates within the cytoplasm of the leading process. Although the leading process of the migrating neuron extends slowly and steadily, the nucleus moves in an intermittent, stepwise manner because of complex rearrangements of the cytoskeleton. A microtubular lattice forms a cage around the nucleus; movement of the nucleus depends on a centrosome-like structure, termed a basal body from which a system of microtubules projects into the leading process, providing tracks along which the nucleus moves (Figure 46–7A). Neuronal migration along radial glia also involves adhesive interactions between cells. Adhesive receptors such as integrins promote neuronal extension on

## Classical anatomical studies of cortical development in the 1970s provided evidence that neurons generated in the ventricular zone migrate to their settling

Figure 46–5 (Opposite) The migration of neurons within position along a pathway of radial glial fibers. Radial glial cells serve as the primary scaffold for radial neuronal migration. Their cell bodies are located close to

the embryonic cerebral cortex leads to layered cortical

organization. (Adapted from Olsen and Walsh 2002.)

,

radial glial cells. The migration of neurons along glial fibers is nevertheless different from the extension of axons driven by growth cones (Chapter 47). In neuronal migration, the leading process is devoid of the structured actin filaments that typify growth cones and more closely resembles an extending dendrite, an inference made first by Santiago Ramón y Cajal. Disruption in the migratory and settling programs of cortical neurons underlies much human cortical pathology (Figure 46–5C). For example, in lissencephaly

As they approach the pial surface, neurons stop migrating and

detach from radial glial cells. This orderly inside-out pattern of

neuronal migration results in the formation of six neuronal layers

A. This temporal sequence of neurogenesis is for the mouse cerebral cortex. Neurons begin to accumulate in the cortical plate during the last 5 days of embryonic development.

Within the cortical plate, neurons populate the deep layers before settling in the superficial layers. (Abbreviations: IZ intermediate zone; MZ, marginal zone; PP, preplate; SP , subplate; SVZ, subventricular zone; VZ, ventricular zone; WM, white matter.) B. During normal cortical development, neurons use radial glial cells as migratory scaffolds as they enter the cortical plate.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1137

, in the mature cerebral cortex, arranged between the white matter and subplate. (Abbreviation: CP, cortical plate.) C. In the mouse mutant reeler, which lacks functional reelin protein, the layering of neurons in the cortical plate is severely disrupted and partially inverted. In addition, the entire cortical

plate develops beneath the subplate. In doublecortin mutants, the cortex is thickened, neurons lose their characteristic layered identity, and some layers contain fewer neurons. A similar disruption is observed in Lis1 mutants, which underlies certain forms of human lissencephaly.

10/12/20 8:25 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

<!-- image -->

in the embryonic cerebral cortex extend a leading process that

(Greek, smooth brain, referring to the characteristic

smoothing of the cortical surface in patients with the

disorder), neurons leave the ventricular zone but fail

to complete their migration into the cortical plate. As a result, the mature cortex is typically reduced from six to four neuronal layers, and the arrangement of neurons in each remaining layer is disordered. Occasionally, lissencephaly is accompanied by the presence of an additional group of neurons in the subcortical white matter. Patients with lissencephalies from mutations in the Lis1 and doublecortin genes often suffer severe intellectual disability and intractable epilepsy. The Lis1 and doublecortin proteins have been localized to microtubules, suggesting that they are involved in microtubule-dependent nuclear movement, although their precise functions in neuronal migration remain unclear. Mutations that disrupt the reelin signaling pathway disrupt the final stage of neuronal migration through the cortical subplate. The reelin protein is

secreted from the Cajal-Retzius cells, a class of neurons found in the preplate and marginal zone. Signals from these cells are crucial for the migration of cortical

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1138

Leading

process

Process

of radial

glial cell

Trailing

process

wraps around the shaft of the radial glial cell, thus using the

radial glial cells as scaffolds during their migration from the

ventricular zone to the pial surface of cortex.

neurons. In mice lacking functional reelin, neurons fail

to detach from their radial glial scaffolds and pile up

underneath the cortical plate, disobeying the inside-

out migratory rule. As a consequence, the normal layering of cell types is partially inverted and the marginal zone is lost. Reelin acts through cell-surface receptors that include the ApoE receptor 2 and the very-lowdensity lipoprotein receptor. The binding of reelin to these receptors activates an intracellular protein, Dab1, which transduces reelin signals. Not surprisingly, the loss of proteins that transduce reelin signals produces similar migratory phenotypes. Cortical Interneurons Arise Subcortically and Migrate Tangentially to Cortex

## Progenitor cells in the cortical ventricular zone were initially believed to give rise to all cortical neurons. However, as better molecular labels for distinct neuronal

types became available, it was found that interneurons arise in the ventricular zone of subcortical structures. Most of them originate in regions of the ventral telencephalon called the ganglionic eminences (Figure 46–8).

10/12/20 8:25 AM

A

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


The medial and central eminences generate most

cortical interneurons, which migrate dorsally from

their sites of origin to enter the cortex. Some enter

through the intermediate zone, while others enter through the marginal zone (Figure 46–5A). Once they reach particular anterior-posterior and mediolateral positions, they switch to a radial mode of migration

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1139

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

Retraction of

lagging edge

Figure 46–7 Cytoskeletal proteins power the migration of

neurons along radial glia.

A. The microtubular cytoskeleton has an important role in neu-

ronal migration. Microtubules envelop the nucleus in a cage-like structure. Migration along radial glial cells involves elongation

of the leading process of the neuron in the direction of movement, under the control of attractive and repellant extracellular guidance cues. These cues regulate the phosphorylation status of the microtubule-associated proteins Ndel1 and Lis1 (two components of the dynein motor complex) and of doublecortin (Dcx), which together stabilize the microtubule cytoskeleton. (Adapted from Gleeson and Walsh 2000.) B. Microtubules are attached to the centrosome by a series of proteins that are targets for disruption in neuronal migration disorders.

to travel the final distance to appropriate layers.

Distinct populations of neurons generated in the

ganglionic eminences migrate at different times and

through different routes, contributing to the diversity of the interneuronal population. Precise relationships between time and place of origin, migratory route, and ultimate fate remain to be determined.

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Lis1



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Cortex

Striatum

Hippocampus

Amygdala

Globus pallidus Cortex Striatum Hippocampus Amygdala Striatum Olfactory bulb populating the hippocampus, striatum, globus pallidus, and amygdala with interneurons. The lateral ganglionic eminence generates cells that migrate to the striatum and the olfactory

<!-- image -->

ebral cortex. Neurons generated in the ganglionic eminences

migrate to and settle in many regions of the forebrain, where they differentiate into interneurons. Cortical interneurons arise from medial and caudal ganglionic eminences. Other cells generated in these regions migrate in other directions, Nonetheless, it is now clear that cortical neurons originate from two sources: excitatory neurons from the

cortical ventricular zone and interneurons from the

ganglionic eminences. Interneurons in other forebrain structures also arise from the ganglionic eminences, as well as a few other subcortical sites such as the preoptic area. Cells

migrating caudally from the medial and caudal eminences populate the hippocampus, while cells migrating ventrolaterally from these regions populate the basal ganglia. In contrast, neurons generated in the lateral ganglionic eminence migrate rostrally and contribute the periglomerular and granule interneurons of the olfactory bulb. In this rostral migratory stream, neurons use neighboring neurons as substrates for migration (chain migration). In the adult brain, neurons that follow the rostral migratory stream originate instead in the subventricular zone of the striatum. Transcription factors control the character of ganglionic eminence neurons. The homeodomain proteins Dlx1 and Dlx2 are expressed by cells in the ganglionic

eminences. In mice lacking Dlx1 and Dlx2 activity, the

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1140

bulb. Cells migrating to the bulb use neighboring migrating cells as substrates for migration, a process called chain migration. (Adapted, with permission, from Bandler, Mayer, and Fishell 2017. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd.) resultant perturbation of neuronal migration leads to a profound reduction in the number of GABAergic

interneurons in the cortex. Other transcription factors

are responsible for differences among ganglionic eminences. For example, Nkx2.1 is selectively expressed by cells in the medial ganglionic eminence. In its absence, interneurons generated in this region take on characteristics of those normally generated in the lateral and caudal ganglionic eminences. Yet other transcription factors specify the distinct characteristics of subpopulations of neurons within each ganglionic eminence. One of the main features that these transcription factors specify is the migratory path that the newborn interneurons take. A host of soluble and cell surface

factors produced by cells in and near the ganglionic eminences provide repulsive cues that lead to expulsion of cells from the ventricular zone, so-called moto -genic (movement-promoting) cues that speed their migration and attractive cues that direct them to their targets. These factors include slits, semaphorins, and ephrins, all of which we will encounter in Chapter 47 as molecules that guide axons to their targets.

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Neural Crest Cell Migration in the Peripheral

Nervous System Does Not Rely on Scaffolding

## The peripheral nervous system derives from neural crest stem cells, a small group of neuroepithelial cells at the boundary of the neural tube and epidermal ecto-

derm. Soon after their induction, neural crest cells are transformed from epithelial to mesenchymal cells and begin to detach from the neural tube. They then migrate to many sites throughout the body (Figure 46–9). Neural crest cell migration does not rely on scaffolding (ie, radial glial cells or preexisting axon tracts) and thus is called free migration. This form of neuronal migration requires significant cytoarchitectural and cell adhesive changes and differs from most of the migratory events in the central nervous system. Neural crest migration is promoted and guided by several families of secreted factors. For example, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), which are critical for

neural crest induction at an earlier stage (Chapter 45), are required for neural crest migration at later stages. Exposure of neural epithelial cells to BMPs triggers molecular changes that convert epithelial cells to a mesenchymal state, causing them to delaminate from the neural tube and migrate into the periphery. BMPs trigger changes in neural crest cells by inducing expression of transcription factors, notably the zinc finger proteins snail, slug, and twist, which have a conserved role in promoting epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions. These transcription factors direct expression of proteins that regulate the properties of the cytoskeleton as well as enzymes that degrade extracellular matrix proteins. These enzymes give neural crest cells the ability to break down the basement membrane surrounding the epithelium of the neural tube, permitting them to embark on their migratory journey into the periphery. As neural crest cells begin to delaminate, their expression of cell adhesion molecules changes. Alterations in expression of adhesive proteins, notably cad-

herins, permit neural crest cells to loosen their adhesive contacts with neural tube cells and begin the delamination process. Neural crest cells also begin to express integrins, receptors for extracellular matrix proteins such as laminins and collagens that are found along peripheral migratory paths. The first structures encountered by migrating neural crest cells are somites, epithelial cells that later give rise to muscle and cartilage. Neural crest cells pass

through the anterior half of each somite but avoid the posterior half (Figure 46–9A). The rostral channeling of migratory neural crest cells is imposed by ephrin B proteins, which are concentrated in the posterior half

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1141

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


of each somite. Ephrins provide a repellant signal that

interacts with EphB class tyrosine kinase receptors on

neural crest cells to prevent their invasion. Neural crest

cells that remain within the anterior sclerotome of the somite differentiate into sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglia; those that migrate around the dorsal region of the somite approach the skin and give rise to melanocytes. Differentiation of the neural crest into its various derivatives depends on complex interactions between the distinct cues that cells receive along their journey

and intrinsic predispositions that vary along the rostrocaudal axis. Development of sensory neurons is initiated at the time the cells emigrate from the neural tube. The cells are exposed to signals from the dorsal neural tube and somites that induce expression of neurogenin, a transcription factor of the bHLH family, which in turn promotes a sensory fate. Subsequent influences diversify the neurons into multiple sensory types, such as nociceptive and proprioceptive neurons (Figure 46–10). In contrast, those neural crest cells that follow a more medial and ventral migratory path are exposed to BMPs secreted from the dorsal aorta. They express the bHLH factor Mash1, which leads to their differentiation into sympathetic neurons. Structural and Molecular Innovations Underlie the Expansion of the Human Cerebral Cortex

## No mice or monkeys are reading this book. This is in large part because the human brain is different from

that of even our closest relatives, both qualitatively

and quantitatively. Yet most studies of mammalian neural development have been carried out on mice, whose brain contains approximately 1,000-fold fewer neurons than those of the human brain and 100-fold fewer than the best-studied nonhuman primate, the rhesus macaque. Recently, however, new methods are making it possible to elucidate some of the molecular and structural features that lead to the expansion of the human brain and particularly the human cerebral cortex. Classical anatomical studies made clear that the primate cortex has not only a far larger size and thickness than that of rodents but also more discrete areas

and more layers (Figure 46–11A). In addition, the packing density of neurons is higher in primates than in mice, so the difference in neuronal number is greater than would be expected from size alone. One main contributor to the expansion in primates is a large pool of neuronal progenitors. Many of these progenitors are a second type of radial glial cell, called the outer radial

10/12/20 8:25 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Migratory paths

## Epidermis

<!-- image -->

A. A cross section through the middle part of the trunk of a

chick embryo shows the main pathways of neural crest cells. Some cells migrate along a superficial pathway, just beneath

the ectoderm, and differentiate into pigment cells of the skin. Others migrate along a deeper pathway that takes them through the somites, where they coalesce to form dorsal root glial cell to distinguish it from the canonical or inner

radial glia described above. Outer radial glia, unlike

inner radial glia, lack contact with the ventricular

surface and exhibit molecular differences from inner radial glia. However, they are capable of generating neurons and serving as a migratory guide. The massive increase in their number in primates, and particularly humans, provides a partial explanation for the increase in the number of neurons in the human cerebral cortex. How can human-specific developmental features be analyzed experimentally? New methods of molecular analysis are making it possible to compare

the proteins, transcripts, and genes of humans with those of our close relatives, resulting in the discovery of intriguing specializations. However, hypotheses

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1142

Neural

crest

Neural tube

50 µm

sensory ganglia. Still others migrate between the neural tube

and somites, past the dorsal aorta. These cells differentiate into

sympathetic ganglia and adrenal medulla. The scanning electron

micrograph shows neural crest cells migrating away from the dorsal surface of the neural tube of a chick embryo. (Micrograph reproduced, with permission, from K. Tosney.) B. Neural crest cells reach their final settling positions where they complete differentiation.

- derived from these findings are difficult to test: Most

of the developmental studies we describe in these

chapters cannot be performed on humans, and even

nonhuman primates are difficult subjects for developmental analysis. A possible solution is the recently devised "organoid" culture system. Cells from adult skin can be reprogrammed to become multipotential progenitors called induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by methods that we

will discuss in Chapter 50. When placed into culture under carefully controlled conditions and allowed to expand in three dimensions (quite unlike conventional two-dimensional cultures), they proliferate and self-organize into structures that resemble the developing forebrain and exhibit species-specific features

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Neural crest cells Epidermis Mash1

Phox2

Sympathetic

precursor Mash1

Cholinergic

sympathetic

neuron

Noradrenergic

sympathetic

neuron

Nociceptive

neuron

Proprioceptive

neuron

innervate and the level of gp130 cytokine signaling (see Figure

46–13). Two bHLH proteins, neurogenin-1 and -2, direct neural

crest cells along a sensory neuronal pathway. Sensory neurons

<!-- image -->

ral crest cells are controlled by transcription factor expression.

Expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein Mash1 directs neural crest cells along a sympathetic neuronal pathway. Sympathetic neurons can acquire noradrenergic or cholinergic transmitter phenotypes depending on the target cells they

(Figure 46–11B). Most notably, organoids from human

cells contain a bilayered, large subventricular zone

with numerous outer radial glia, whereas organoids

from mouse cells contain a smaller subventricular zone containing predominately conventional or inner radial glia. These organoids can be used to elucidate the development of at least some early aspects of human cortical development. Additional applications abound. One is to obtain iPSCs from patients with brain disorders. Organoids derived from such patients have features that may lead

to cortical malformations such as lissencephaly (see Figure 46–5). The hope is that these organoids can be used to elucidate disease mechanisms and eventually test therapies. A second application is to compare organoids derived from chimpanzee and human iPSCs. This comparison provides a novel means of investigating the most recent evolutionary innovations that separate us from our closest living relatives. Intrinsic Programs and Extrinsic Factors

Determine the Neurotransmitter Phenotypes

of Neurons

## Neurons continue to develop after they have migrated to their final position, and no aspect of their later dif-

ferentiation is more important than the choice of

chemical neurotransmitter. Neurons that populate the brain use two major neurotransmitters: The amino

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1143

that express the transcription factor Runx1 and the tyrosine kinase receptor TrkA become nociceptors; those that express Runx3 and TrkC become proprioceptors. (Abbreviations: Ngn-1 neurogenin-1; Ngn-2, neurogenin-2.)

,

acid l-glutamate is the major excitatory transmitter,

whereas γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major

inhibitory transmitter. Some spinal cord neurons use

another amino acid, glycine, as their inhibitory transmitter. In the peripheral nervous system, sensory neurons use glutamate, motor neurons use acetylcholine, and autonomic neurons use acetylcholine or norepinephrine. Smaller numbers of neurons use other transmitters, such as serotonin and dopamine. The choice of neurotransmitter determines which postsynaptic cells a neuron can talk to and what it can say. Neurotransmitter Choice Is a Core Component of Transcriptional Programs of Neuronal

Differentiation

## Distinct molecular programs are used to establish neurotransmitter phenotype in different brain regions

and neuronal classes. We shall illustrate the general

strategy for assignment of amino acid neurotransmitter phenotypes by focusing on neurons in the cerebral cortex and cerebellum. The cerebral cortex contains glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that are generated within the cortical plate and rely on the bHLH factors neurogenin-1 and

neurogenin-2 for their differentiation. In contrast, as discussed earlier in the chapter (see Figure 46–8), most GABAergic inhibitory interneurons migrate into the cortex from the ganglionic eminences; their inhibitory transmitter character is specified by the bHLH protein

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

Target-derived

gp130 cytokine

Sympathetic

neuron



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

Mature

progenitor

zones Cortical layering



<!-- image -->

tributes to cortical specialization in humans and other

primates.

A. The size of the neuroepithelium is initially small in both rodents and humans, but their relative size differs dramatically as development proceeds, owing to increased self-renewal

rates and larger numbers of progenitors in humans. The primate subventricular zone is greatly enlarged compared to the mouse and becomes subdivided into inner and outer regions, which contain large populations of radial glial cells, both of which generate neurons. In mice, nearly all radial glial cells are of the inner type. (Abbreviations: CP, cortical plate; IFL, inner

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1144

Satb2

Ctip2

Pax6

fiber layer; ISVZ, inner subventricular zone; IZ, intermediate

zone; MZ, marginal zone; OFL, outer fiberlayer; OSVZ, outer

subventricular zone; SP, subplate; SVZ, subventricular zone;

VZ, ventricular zone.) (Adapted, with permission, from Giandomenico and Lancaster 2017.) B. Section through an organoid generated from human induced pluripotent stem cells. The area between the white lines is enlarged in the micrograph on the right. The section was stained

with antibodies to transcription factors (Satb2, Ctip2, and Pax6) selectively expressed in specific layers in human cortex, demonstrating that a layered cortical structure develops in the organoid. (Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from P. Arlotta.)

Adult structure

10/12/20 8:25 AM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

Mature

progenitor

zones Cortical layering



<!-- image -->

tributes to cortical specialization in humans and other

primates.

A. The size of the neuroepithelium is initially small in both rodents and humans, but their relative size differs dramatically as development proceeds, owing to increased self-renewal

rates and larger numbers of progenitors in humans. The primate subventricular zone is greatly enlarged compared to the mouse and becomes subdivided into inner and outer regions, which contain large populations of radial glial cells, both of which generate neurons. In mice, nearly all radial glial cells are of the inner type. (Abbreviations: CP, cortical plate; IFL, inner

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1144

Satb2

Ctip2

Pax6

fiber layer; ISVZ, inner subventricular zone; IZ, intermediate

zone; MZ, marginal zone; OFL, outer fiberlayer; OSVZ, outer

subventricular zone; SP, subplate; SVZ, subventricular zone;

VZ, ventricular zone.) (Adapted, with permission, from Giandomenico and Lancaster 2017.) B. Section through an organoid generated from human induced pluripotent stem cells. The area between the white lines is enlarged in the micrograph on the right. The section was stained

with antibodies to transcription factors (Satb2, Ctip2, and Pax6) selectively expressed in specific layers in human cortex, demonstrating that a layered cortical structure develops in the organoid. (Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from P. Arlotta.)

Adult structure

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Mash1 (Figure 46–12A) as well as by the Dlx1 and Dlx2

proteins.

Similarly, the cerebellum contains several different

classes of inhibitory neurons (Purkinje, Golgi, basket, and stellate neurons) and two major classes of excitatory

neurons (granule neurons and large cerebellar nucleus neurons). These inhibitory and excitatory neurons have different origins; GABAergic neurons derive from the ventricular zone, whereas glutamatergic neurons migrate into the cerebellum from the rhombic lip. The generation of GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons is controlled by two different bHLH transcription factors, Ptf1a for inhibitory and Math-1 for excitatory neurons

A Cerebral cortex

<!-- image -->

factors.

A. GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons in the cerebral cortex are generated in different proliferative zones and are specified by different basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors.

Glutamatergic pyramidal neurons derive from the cortical ventricular zone, and their differentiation depends on the activities of neurogenin-1 and -2. The differentiation of GABAergic interneurons in the ganglionic eminences of the ventral telencephalon depends on the bHLH protein Mash1. These neurons

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1145

Purkinje cell

layer

Inner granule

cell layer

B. GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons in the developing

cerebellum also derive from different proliferative zones and are specified by different bHLH transcription factors. Gluta-

matergic granule cells migrate into the cerebellum from the rhombic lip, settle in the inner granular layer, and are specified by the bHLH protein Math-1. GABAergic Purkinje neurons migrate from the deep cerebellar proliferative zone, settle in the Purkinje cell layer, and are specified by the bHLH protein Ptf1a.

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


(Figure 46–12B). These bHLH factors are expressed by

neuroepithelial cells but not by mature neurons, implying

that differentiation into glutamatergic and GABAergic

neurons is initiated prior to neuronal generation. Transcriptional programs also determine the transmitter phenotype in the peripheral nervous system. For example, BMPs promote noradrenergic neuronal

differentiation by inducing the expression of a variety of transcription factors that include the bHLH protein Mash1, the homeodomain protein Phox2, and the zinc finger protein Gata2. In contrast, Runx proteins are determinants of the glutamatergic phenotype of sensory neurons (Figure 46–10).

Glutamatergic neurons

GABAergic neurons


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Signals From Synaptic Inputs and Targets Can

Influence the Transmitter Phenotypes of Neurons

Because neurotransmitter phenotype is a core neu-

## ronal property, it was long thought that transmitter properties were fixed at the earliest stage of neuronal

differentiation. This view was challenged by studies showing that the migratory pathway of a neural crest cell exposes the cell to environmental signals that have a critical role in determining its transmitter phenotype. Most sympathetic neurons use norepinephrine as their primary transmitter. However, those that innervate the exocrine sweat glands in the footpads use

acetylcholine, and even these neurons express norepinephrine when they first innervate the sweat glands of the skin. Only after their axons have contacted the sweat glands do they stop synthesizing norepinephrine and start producing acetylcholine.

Norepinephrine

<!-- image -->

initially specified with a noradrenergic transmitter phenotype.

Most sympathetic neurons, including those that innervate cardiac muscle cells, retain this transmitter phenotype, and their terminals are packed with the dense-core vesicles in which norepinephrine is stored. But the sympathetic neurons that innervate sweat gland targets are induced to switch to a cholinergic

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1146

Gland

cells

transmitter phenotype; their terminals become filled with the

small clear vesicles in which acetylcholine (ACh) is stored. Sweat

gland cells direct the switch by secreting members of the inter-

leukin cytokine family. Several members of this family, including leukemia inhibitory factor and ciliary neurotrophic factor, are potent inducers of cholinergic phenotype in sympathetic neurons grown in cell culture. (Abbreviation: IL6, interleukin-6.) (Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from S. Landis.)

When the sweat glands from the footpad of a new-

born rat are transplanted into a region that is normally

innervated by noradrenergic sympathetic neurons, the

synaptic neurons acquire cholinergic transmitter properties, indicating that cells of the sweat gland secrete factors that induce cholinergic properties in sympathetic neurons. Several secreted factors trigger the switch from a noradrenergic to cholinergic phenotype in sympathetic neurons. The sweat gland secretes a cocktail of interleu-

kin-6–like cytokines, notably cardiotrophin-1, leukemia inhibitory factor, and ciliary neurotrophic factor. Several aspects of neuronal metabolism that are linked to transmitter synthesis and release are controlled by these factors. The neurons stop producing the large densecore granules characteristic of noradrenergic neurons and start making the small electron-translucent vesicles typical of cholinergic neurons (Figure 46–13).

IL6-class

cytokine

10/12/20 8:25 AM

More recently, evidence has accumulated that the

transmitter phenotype of central neurons can also be

influenced by signals including hormones and electri-

cal activity. When the spontaneous activity of embryonic amphibian neurons is increased, some motor neurons can be respecified to synthesize and use the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA instead of or in addition to acetylcholine. Conversely, when activity is decreased, some inhibitory neurons switch to using the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate along with or instead of GABA. Postsynaptic partners typically express new receptors that correspond to the transmitter being released onto them. These switches occur without overall respecification of the neuron and are best viewed as homeostatic responses aimed at keeping the overall activity of the system in a narrow range. Although such transmitter switches in central neurons are likely to occur only rarely under natural conditions, activity-dependent neurotransmitter plasticity

may be a more common phenomenon in the adult nervous system. For example, changes in the light cycle where rodents are housed can lead to reciprocal changes in the numbers of neurons that use dopamine and somatostatin as neuromodulators in areas of the brain responsible for maintaining a circadian rhythm. In this and other cases, neurotransmitter switching has measurable consequences on the behavior of the animal, suggesting that this process, along with less drastic synaptic changes discussed in Chapter 49, are employed by the brain as responses to novel environments. The Survival of a Neuron Is Regulated by

Neurotrophic Signals From the Neuron's Target

## One of the more surprising findings in developmental neuroscience is that a large fraction of the neurons gener-

ated in the embryonic nervous system end up dying later

in embryonic development. Equally surprising, we now know that the potential for cell death is preprogrammed in most animal cells, including neurons. Thus, decisions about life and death are aspects of a neuron's fate. The Neurotrophic Factor Hypothesis Was Confirmed by the Discovery of Nerve Growth Factor

## The target of a neuron is a key source of factors essential for the neuron's survival. The critical role of target cells in neuronal survival was discovered in studies of

the dorsal root ganglia. In the 1930s, Samuel Detwiler and Viktor Hamburger discovered that the number of sensory neurons in embryos is increased by transplantation of an

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1147

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


additional limb bud into the target field and decreased

if the limb target is removed. At the time, these find-

ings were thought to reflect an influence of the limb

on the proliferation and subsequent differentiation of sensory neuron precursors. In the 1940s, however, Rita Levi-Montalcini made the startling observation that the death of neurons is not simply a consequence of pathology or experimental manipulation, but rather occurs during the normal program of embryonic development. Levi-Montalcini and Hamburger went on to show that removal of a limb leads to the exces -sive death of sensory neurons rather than a decrease in their production. These early discoveries on the life and death of sensory neurons were quickly extended to neurons in the central nervous system. Hamburger found that

approximately half of all motor neurons generated in the spinal cord die during embryonic development. Moreover, in experiments similar to those performed on sensory ganglia, Hamburger discovered that motor neuron death could be increased by removing a limb and reduced by adding an additional limb (Figure 46–14A,B). These findings indicate that signals from target cells are critical for the survival of neurons within the central as well as peripheral nervous system. In some cases, manipulating synaptic activity affects the extent of death, perhaps by modulating the types or amount of signals that the target cell produces (Figure 46–14C). We now know that the phenomenon of neuronal overproduction, followed by a phase of neuronal death, occurs in most regions of the vertebrate nervous system. The early discoveries of Levi-Montalcini and Hamburger laid the foundations for the neurotrophic factor hypothesis. The core of this hypothesis is that cells

at or near the target of a neuron secrete small amounts of an essential nutrient or trophic factor and that the uptake of this factor by nerve terminals is needed for the survival of the neuron (Figure 46–15). This hypothesis was dramatically confirmed in the 1970s when Levi-Montalcini and Stanley Cohen purified the protein we now know as nerve growth factor (NGF) and showed that this protein is made by target cells and supports the survival of sensory and sympathetic neurons in vitro. Moreover, neutralizing antibodies directed against NGF were found to cause a profound loss of sympathetic and sensory neurons in vivo. Neurotrophins Are the Best-Studied Neurotrophic Factors

## The discovery of NGF prompted a search for additional neurotrophic factors. Today, we know of over a

10/12/20 8:25 AM


Figure 46–14 The survival of motor

neurons depends on signals pro-

vided by their muscle targets.  The

role of the muscle target in motor neuron survival was demonstrated by Viktor Hamburger in a classic series of experiments performed on the chick embryo. (Adapted from Purves and Lichtman 1985.) A. A limb bud was removed from a 2.5-day-old chick embryo soon after the arrival of motor nerves. A section

of the lumbar spinal cord 1 week later reveals few surviving motor neurons on the deprived side of the spinal cord. The number of motor neurons on the contralateral side with an intact limb is normal. B. An extra limb bud was grafted adjacent to a host limb prior to the normal period of motor neuron death. A sec-

- tion of the lumbar spinal cord 2 weeks later shows an increased number of limb motor neurons on the side with the extra limb. C. Blockade of nerve-muscle activity with the toxin curare, which blocks acetylcholine receptors, rescues many

motor neurons that would otherwise

- die. Curare may act by enhancing the release of trophic factors from inactive muscle.

<!-- image -->

dozen secreted factors that promote neuronal survival.

The best-studied are related to NGF and are called the

neurotrophin family.

There are four main neurotrophins: NGF itself, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and neurotrophins-3 and -4 (NT-3 and NT-4). Other classes of pro-

teins that promote neuronal survival include members of the transforming growth factor β family, the interleukin-6–related cytokines, fibroblast growth factors, and even certain inductive signals we encountered earlier (BMPs and hedgehogs). Other neurotrophic factors, notably members of the glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family, are responsible for the survival of different types of sensory and sympathetic neurons (Figure 46–16). Neurotrophins interact with two major classes of receptors, the Trk receptors and p75. Neurotrophins promote cell survival through activation of Trk receptors.

The Trk family comprises three membrane-spanning

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1148

C Neuromuscular paralysis

(curare treated)

(75% survive)

tyrosine kinases named TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC, each of

which exists as a dimer (Figure 46–17).

Much is now known about the intracellular signal-

ing pathways activated by binding of neurotrophins to Trks. As with other tyrosine kinase receptors, the binding

of neurotrophins to Trk receptors leads to dimerization of the Trk proteins. Dimerization results in phosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues in the activation loop of the kinase domain. This phosphorylation leads to a conformational change in the receptor and to phosphorylation of tyrosine residues that serve as docking sites for adaptor proteins. The adaptors then trigger production of second messengers that both promote the survival of neurons and trigger their maturation. These divergent biological responses involve different intracellular signaling pathways: neuronal differentiation largely via the mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK) enzymatic pathways and survival largely via the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathway (Figure 46–18).

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Removal of a developing

limb bud B Transplantation of an extra limb bud

A

Proprioceptive sensory neurons that innervate Neurons approach target Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


Target source of

neurotrophic factor

Limited supply of

neurotrophic factor

derived neurotrophic factor. Motor neurons depend on glial

muscle spindles depend on neurotrophin-3 (NT-3); nociceptive neurons that innervate skin depend on nerve growth factor (NGF) and neurturin; mechanoreceptive neurons that innervate

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1149

cell line–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and other factors. Sympathetic neurons depend on NGF, NT-3, and GDNF. (Adapted from Reichardt and Fariñas 1997.)

10/12/20 8:25 AM


Figure 46–17 Neurotrophins and their recep-

tors. Each of the three main neurotrophins

interacts with a different transmembrane

tyrosine kinase receptor (Trk). In addition, all three neurotrophins can bind to the low-affinity neurotrophin receptor p75. (Abbreviations: BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF , nerve growth factor; NT-3, neurotrophin-3.) A fourth neurotrophin, NT-4, is not shown. (Adapted from Reichardt and Fariñas 1997.)

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

NGF

BDNF

NT-3

NGF BDNF NT-3

<!-- image -->

In contrast to the specificity of Trk receptor interac-

tions, all neurotrophins bind the receptor p75 (Figure

46–17). In some cases, p75 works along with Trk recep-

tors, tuning the affinity and specificity of Trks for their neurotrophin ligands and thereby contributing to neuronal survival. However, p75 leads a double life. It can also bind unprocessed precursors of neurotrophins, called proneurotrophins, and it can associate with other membrane receptors called sortilins. Binding of proneurotrophins to the p75/sortilin complex pro- NGF motes neuronal death. Receptor p75 is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family and promotes cell death by activating proteases of the caspase family, which we discuss below.

Figure 46–18 Binding of nerve growth factor to the TrkA

receptor activates alternative intracellular signaling path-

ways.  The binding of nerve growth factor (NGF) induces

dimerization of the TrkA receptor, which triggers its phosphorylation at many different residues. Phosphorylation of TrkA results in the recruitment of the adaptor proteins SHC, GRB2, and SOS. The additional recruitment of FRS2 to this complex (left) activates a Ras kinase signaling pathway that promotes neuronal differentiation. In the absence of FRS2 (right), the complex activates a phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3-K) pathway that promotes neuronal survival. (Abbreviations: Akt/PKB , protein kinase B; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; MEK, mitogen-activated/ERK kinase; P, phosphate.)

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1150

<!-- image -->

10/12/20 8:25 AM

Neurotrophin signaling is relayed from the axon

terminal to the cell body of the neuron through a process

that involves internalization of a complex of neurotro-

phin bound to Trk receptors. The retrograde transport of this complex occurs in a class of endocytotic vesicles called signaling endosomes. The transport of these vesicles brings activated Trk receptors into cellular compartments able to activate signaling pathways and transcriptional programs essential for neuronal survival, maturation, and synaptic differentiation. The picture is more complex for neurons in the central nervous system. The survival of motor neurons, for example, is not dependent on a single neurotrophic

factor. Instead, different classes of motor neurons require neurotrophins, GDNF, and interleukin-6–like proteins expressed by muscles or peripheral glial cells. The survival of these neuronal classes depends on the exposure of axons to local neurotrophic factors. Neurotrophic Factors Suppress a Latent Cell Death Program Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


prompted a screen for genes that block or enhance

cell death, which led to the identification of the cell

death (ced) genes. Two of these genes, ced-3 and ced-4

,

are needed for the death of neurons; in their absence, every one of the cells destined to die instead survives. A third gene, ced-9, is needed for survival and works by antagonizing the activities of ced-3 and ced-4 (Figure 46–19). Thus, in the absence of ced-9, many additional cells die, even though these deaths still depend on ced-3 and ced-4 activity. The cell death pathway in C. elegans has been conserved in mammals. Similar proteins and pathways control the apoptotic death of central and peripheral

neurons, indeed of all developing cells. The worm ced-9 gene encodes a protein that is related to members of the mammalian Bcl-2 family, which protect

## Neurotrophic factors were once believed to promote the survival of neural cells by stimulating their metab-

olism in beneficial ways, hence their name. It is now

evident, however, that neurotrophic factors suppress a latent death program present in all cells of the body, including neurons. This biochemical pathway can be considered a suicide program. Once it is activated, cells die by apoptosis (Greek, falling away): They round up, form blebs,

condense their chromatin, and fragment their nuclei. Apoptotic cell deaths are distinguishable from necrosis, which typically results from acute traumatic injury and involves rapid lysis of cell membranes without activation of the cell death program. The first clue that deprivation of neurotrophic factors kills neurons by unleashing an active biochemical program emerged from studies that assessed neuronal

survival after inhibition of RNA and protein synthesis. Exposure of sympathetic neurons to protein synthesis inhibitors was found to prevent the death of sympathetic neurons triggered by removal of NGF. These results sparked the idea that neurons have the ability to synthesize proteins that are lethal and that NGF prevents their synthesis, thereby suppressing an endogenous cell death program. Key insights into the biochemical nature of the endogenous cell death program emerged from genetic studies of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. During

<!-- image -->

the development of C. elegans, a precise number of cells is generated and a fixed number of these cells die—the same number from embryo to embryo. The findings

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1151

BAD

cade that involves a series of death effector genes. These death

genes and pathways have been conserved in the evolution of species from worms to humans. The core death pathway activates a set of proteolytic enzymes, the caspases. Caspases cleave many downstream and essential protein substrates (see Figure 46–20), resulting in the death of cells by a process termed apoptosis. Genetic analysis of the worm Caenorhabditis elegans indicates that the Ced-9 protein acts upstream and inhibits the activity of Ced-4 and Ced-3, two proteins that promote cell death. Many vertebrate homologs of Ced-9, the Bcl-2 family of proteins, have been identified. Some of these proteins, such as Bcl-2 itself, inhibit cell death, but others promote cell death by antagonizing the actions of Bcl-2. The Bcl-2 class proteins act upstream of Apaf-1 (a vertebrate homolog of Ced-4) and the caspases (vertebrate homologs of Ced-3).

10/12/20 8:25 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

lymphocytes and other cells from apoptotic death. The

worm ced-3 gene encodes a protein closely related to a

class of mammalian cysteine proteases called caspases.

A B The worm ced-4 gene encodes a protein that is functionally related to a mammalian protein called apoptosis activating factor-1 (Apaf-1).

Extrinsic

death Mitochondria

<!-- image -->

activation and cell death. (Adapted from Jesenberger and

Jentsch 2002.)

The mammalian apoptotic cell death pathway

works in a way that resembles the worm pathway

(Figure 46–20). The morphological and histochemical

changes that accompany the apoptosis of mammalian cells result from the activation of caspases, which cleave specific aspartic acid residues within cellular

NGF

<!-- image -->

TrkA

P

P

by ligands such as tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 or

Fas/CD95. The intrinsic pathway involves stress-induced signals

A. Two types of pathways trigger cell death: extrinsic activation of surface membrane death receptors and intrinsic activation of a mitochondrial pathway. Both pathways result in activation of

caspases such as caspase-8 and caspase-9, which initiate a proteolytic cleavage cascade that converges at the level of caspase-3 activation. Cleavage of the caspase precursor removes the caspase prodomain and produces a proteolytically active enzyme conformation.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1152

such as DNA damage that initiate the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondrial intermembrane space. Cytochrome c binds to Apaf-1 and recruits and activates caspase-9. B. Binding of neurotrophins to Trk receptors recruits the PI3 kinase pathway and Akt and suppresses the cell death pathway by inhibiting caspase-9. This pathway is inhibited in developing

neurons by neurotrophic factors, explaining why withdrawal of these factors leads to apoptosis. (Abbreviations: NGF, nerve growth factor; P, phosphate.)

10/12/20 8:25 AM

proteins. Two classes of caspases regulate apoptotic

death: the initiator and effector caspases. Initiator

caspases (caspase-8, -9, and -10) cleave and activate

effector caspases. Effector caspases (caspase-3 and -7) cleave other protein substrates, thus triggering the apoptotic process. Perhaps 1% of all proteins in the cell serve as substrates for effector caspases. Their cleavage contributes to neuronal apoptosis through many pathways: by activation of proteolytic cascades, inactivation of repair, DNA cleavage, mitochondrial permeabilization, and initiation of phagocytosis. The survival of mammalian neurons depends on the balance between antiapoptotic and proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins. Some Bcl-2

proteins such as BAX and BAK increase the permeability of the mitochondrial outer membranes, causing the release of proapoptotic proteins such as cytochrome c into the cytosol. The release of cytochrome c induces Apaf-1 to bind and activate caspase-9, leading to the cleavage and activation of effector caspases. The binding of neurotrophic factors to their tyrosine kinase receptors is thought to lead to the phosphorylation of protein substrates that promote Bcl-2–like activities (Figure 46–20B). Thus, withdrawal of neurotrophic factors from neurons changes the balance from antiapoptotic to proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family, which triggers the neuron's demise. The caspase cell death program can also be activated by many cellular insults, including DNA damage and anoxia. The activation of cell-surface death

receptors such as Fas by extracellular ligands results in the activation of caspase-8 or -10 as well as the recruitment of death effector proteins such as FADD. Recruitment of an initiator caspase to the Fas-FADD complex then leads to activation of effector caspases. Because many neurodegenerative disorders result in apoptotic death, pharmacological strategies to inhibit caspases are under investigation. Highlights Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

3.


The choice between neuronal and glial fate is

determined by signals from ligands of the Delta

family to receptors of the Notch family on neigh-

- boring cells. Initially, cells express both Notch and Delta. Activation of Notch leads to a glial fate, downregulating Delta, which in turn attenuates Notch activity on the neighbors, promoting their differentiation into neurons. 4. As cortical principal (excitatory) neurons migrate along radial glia, they form cortical layers in an inside-out sequence (layer 6 forms before layer 5,
- and so on). Disruptions of migration are among the causes of intellectual disability and epilepsy. 5. Unlike excitatory neurons, forebrain interneurons arise subcortically in ganglionic eminences and then migrate tangentially into the cortex,
- basal ganglia, and other forebrain structures. 6. Neural crest cells migrate from their source at the dorsal tip of the neural tube through somites and mesenchyme to form sensory and autonomic
- neurons and glia, as well as several nonneural cell types. 7. For principal neurons, interneurons, and peripheral neurons, intrinsic differences and cues encountered along the migratory path interact
- to induce expression of distinct combinations of transcription factors. The transcriptional programs then lead to diversification of the developing neurons into multiple classes and types. 8. The greater complexity of the primate, and particularly the human brain compared to those of lower mammals is due in part to a larger pool of
- neuronal progenitors, including a second type of radial glial cell. 9. A recent advance in the ability to study the human brain is the discovery that complex neuronal ensembles called cerebral organoids can be

1. Stem cells near the ventricular surface of the neu

ral tube divide to expand the neuroepithelium.

Further divisions then generate the neurons

- -generated from stem cells. Although they fail to acquire characteristics of the mature cortex, they enable analysis of some aspects of early brain development and its disorders and may be useful in testing possible therapeutics. 10. The neurotransmitters that neurons use are determined as part of the transcriptional program that endows each neuronal type with its
- and glia of the central nervous system as well as radial glia. 2. Processes of radial glia extend from the ventricular to the pial surface. Radial glial cells continue dividing to form neurons and astrocytes. In the
- cortex, they also serve as a scaffold on which newborn excitatory neurons migrate to appropriate layers.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1153

- defining characteristics. However, extrinsic factors, including patterns of electric activity and hormonal milieu, can lead to transmitter switching in some cases. 11. The nervous system generates up to twice as many neurons as survive in adulthood. The excess is eliminated by a cell death program that
- is conserved from invertebrates to humans.

10/12/20 8:25 AM
proteins. Two classes of caspases regulate apoptotic

death: the initiator and effector caspases. Initiator

caspases (caspase-8, -9, and -10) cleave and activate

effector caspases. Effector caspases (caspase-3 and -7) cleave other protein substrates, thus triggering the apoptotic process. Perhaps 1% of all proteins in the cell serve as substrates for effector caspases. Their cleavage contributes to neuronal apoptosis through many pathways: by activation of proteolytic cascades, inactivation of repair, DNA cleavage, mitochondrial permeabilization, and initiation of phagocytosis. The survival of mammalian neurons depends on the balance between antiapoptotic and proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins. Some Bcl-2

proteins such as BAX and BAK increase the permeability of the mitochondrial outer membranes, causing the release of proapoptotic proteins such as cytochrome c into the cytosol. The release of cytochrome c induces Apaf-1 to bind and activate caspase-9, leading to the cleavage and activation of effector caspases. The binding of neurotrophic factors to their tyrosine kinase receptors is thought to lead to the phosphorylation of protein substrates that promote Bcl-2–like activities (Figure 46–20B). Thus, withdrawal of neurotrophic factors from neurons changes the balance from antiapoptotic to proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family, which triggers the neuron's demise. The caspase cell death program can also be activated by many cellular insults, including DNA damage and anoxia. The activation of cell-surface death

receptors such as Fas by extracellular ligands results in the activation of caspase-8 or -10 as well as the recruitment of death effector proteins such as FADD. Recruitment of an initiator caspase to the Fas-FADD complex then leads to activation of effector caspases. Because many neurodegenerative disorders result in apoptotic death, pharmacological strategies to inhibit caspases are under investigation. Highlights Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells

3.


The choice between neuronal and glial fate is

determined by signals from ligands of the Delta

family to receptors of the Notch family on neigh-

- boring cells. Initially, cells express both Notch and Delta. Activation of Notch leads to a glial fate, downregulating Delta, which in turn attenuates Notch activity on the neighbors, promoting their differentiation into neurons. 4. As cortical principal (excitatory) neurons migrate along radial glia, they form cortical layers in an inside-out sequence (layer 6 forms before layer 5,
- and so on). Disruptions of migration are among the causes of intellectual disability and epilepsy. 5. Unlike excitatory neurons, forebrain interneurons arise subcortically in ganglionic eminences and then migrate tangentially into the cortex,
- basal ganglia, and other forebrain structures. 6. Neural crest cells migrate from their source at the dorsal tip of the neural tube through somites and mesenchyme to form sensory and autonomic
- neurons and glia, as well as several nonneural cell types. 7. For principal neurons, interneurons, and peripheral neurons, intrinsic differences and cues encountered along the migratory path interact
- to induce expression of distinct combinations of transcription factors. The transcriptional programs then lead to diversification of the developing neurons into multiple classes and types. 8. The greater complexity of the primate, and particularly the human brain compared to those of lower mammals is due in part to a larger pool of
- neuronal progenitors, including a second type of radial glial cell. 9. A recent advance in the ability to study the human brain is the discovery that complex neuronal ensembles called cerebral organoids can be

1. Stem cells near the ventricular surface of the neu

ral tube divide to expand the neuroepithelium.

Further divisions then generate the neurons

- -generated from stem cells. Although they fail to acquire characteristics of the mature cortex, they enable analysis of some aspects of early brain development and its disorders and may be useful in testing possible therapeutics. 10. The neurotransmitters that neurons use are determined as part of the transcriptional program that endows each neuronal type with its
- and glia of the central nervous system as well as radial glia. 2. Processes of radial glia extend from the ventricular to the pial surface. Radial glial cells continue dividing to form neurons and astrocytes. In the
- cortex, they also serve as a scaffold on which newborn excitatory neurons migrate to appropriate layers.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1153

- defining characteristics. However, extrinsic factors, including patterns of electric activity and hormonal milieu, can lead to transmitter switching in some cases. 11. The nervous system generates up to twice as many neurons as survive in adulthood. The excess is eliminated by a cell death program that
- is conserved from invertebrates to humans.

10/12/20 8:25 AM


12.

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Trophic factors play a crucial role in determining

which neurons within a population live or die.

They control survival by holding the cell death

- program in check. In some cases, neurons appear to compete for a limited supply of neurotrophic factors; the cell death program is activated in those that lose the competition. 13. Multiple trophic factors are produced in the body, with each controlling the fate of only some neuronal types. The best-studied, called neu-
- rotrophins (nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, neurotrophin-3, and neurotrophin-4), bind to and activate kinases called Trk receptors.

Selected Reading

Di Lullo E, Kriegstein AR. 2017. The use of brain organoids

to investigate neural development and disease. Nat Rev

## Neurosci 18:573–584.

- Gleeson JG, Walsh CA. 2000. Neuronal migration disorders: from genetic diseases to developmental mechanisms. Trends Neurosci 23:352–359.
- Lodato S, Arlotta P. 2015. Generating neuronal diversity in the mammalian cerebral cortex. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31:699–720.
- Spitzer NC. 2017. Neurotransmitter switching in the developing and adult brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:1–19. Wamsley B, Fishell G. 2017. Genetic and activity-dependent
- mechanisms underlying interneuron diversity. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:299–309.
- Wilsch-Bräuninger M, Florio M, Huttner WB. 2016. Neocortex expansion in development and evolution—from cell biology to single genes. Curr Opin Neurobiol 39:122–132.
- References Anderson DJ. 1997. Cellular and molecular biology of neural

crest cell lineage determination. Trends Genet 13:276–280.

Bandler RC, Mayer C, Fishell G. 2017. Cortical interneuron

- specification: the juncture of genes, time and geometry. Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:17–24.
- Bershteyn M, Nowakowski TJ, Pollen AA, et al. 2017. Human iPSC-derived cerebral organoids model cellular features of lissencephaly and reveal prolonged mitosis of outer
- radial glia. Cell Stem Cell 20:435–449.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1154

Costa RO, Perestrelo T, Almeida RD. 2018. PROneurotro-

phins and CONSequences. Mol Neurobiol 55:2934–2951.

Detwiler SR. 1936. Neuroembryology: An Experimental Study.

- New York: Macmillan. Doupe AJ, Landis SC, Patterson PH. 1985. Environmental
- influences in the development of neural crest derivatives: glucocorticoids, growth factors, and chromaffin cell plas-
- ticity. J Neurosci 5:2119–2142. Duband JL. 2006. Neural crest delamination and migration: integrating regulations of cell interactions, locomotion, survival and fate. Adv Exp Med Biol 589:45–77.
- Florio M, Borrell V, Huttner WB. 2017. Human-specific genomic signatures of neocortical expansion. Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:33–44.
- Furshpan EJ, Potter DD, Landis SC. 1982. On the transmitter repertoire of sympathetic neurons in culture. Harvey Lect 76:149–191.
- Giandomenico SL, Lancaster MA. 2017. Probing human brain evolution and development in organoids. Curr Opin Cell Biol 44:36–43.
- Joshua R. Sanes Thomas M. Jessell Gray GE, Sanes JR. 1992. Lineage of radial glia in the chicken optic tectum. Development 114:271–283. Guo J, Anton ES. 2014. Decision making during interneuron
- migration in the developing cerebral cortex. Trends Cell Biol 24:342–351.
- Hamburger V. 1975. Cell death in the development of the lateral motor column of the chick embryo. J Comp Neurol 160:535–546.
- Hamburger V, Levi-Montalcini R. 1949. Proliferation differentiation and degeneration in the spinal ganglia of the chick embryo under normal and experimental conditions.
- J Exp Zool 111:457–501. Hoshino M. 2006. Molecular machinery governing GABAergic neuron specification in the cerebellum. Cerebellum 5: 193–198.
- Howard MJ. 2005. Mechanisms and perspectives on differentiation of autonomic neurons. Dev Biol 277:271–286. Jesenberger V, Jentsch S. 2002. Deadly encounter: ubiquitin
- meets apoptosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3:112–121. Lancaster MA, Renner M, Martin CA, et al. 2013. Cerebral
- organoids model human brain development and microcephaly. Nature 501:373–379.
- Landis SC. 1980. Developmental changes in the neurotransmitter properties of dissociated sympathetic neurons: a cytochemical study of the effects of medium. Dev Biol
- 77:349–361. Le Douarin NM. 1998. Cell line segregation during peripheral nervous system ontogeny. Science 231:1515–1522. Nowakowski TJ, Pollen AA, Sandoval-Espinosa C,
- Kriegstein AR. 2016. Transformation of the radial glia scaffold demarcates two stages of human cerebral cortex
- development. Neuron 91:1219–1227. Olson EC, Walsh CA. 2002. Smooth, rough and upsidedown neocortical development. Curr Opin Genet Dev 12:320–327.
- Oppenheim RW. 1981. Neuronal cell death and some related regressive phenomena during neurogenesis: a selective

10/12/20 8:25 AM

historical review and progress report. In: WM Cowan

(ed). Studies in Developmental Neurobiology: Essays in Honor

of Viktor Hamburger, pp. 74–133. New York: Oxford Univ.

- Press. Purves D, Lichtman JW. 1985. Principles of Neural Development. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. Qian X, Goderie SK, Shen Q, Stern JH, Temple S. 1998.
- Intrinsic programs of patterned cell lineages in isolated vertebrate CNS ventricular zone cells. Development
- 125:3143–3152. Reichardt LF. 2006. Neurotrophin-regulated signaling pathways. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361:1545–1564. Reichardt LF, Fariñas I. 1997. Neurotrophic factors and their
- receptors: roles in neuronal development and function. In: MW Cowan, TM Jessell, L Zipursky (eds). Molecular
- Approaches to Neural Development, pp. 220–263. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.

Kandel-Ch46\_1130-1155.indd 1155

Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells


Sánchez-Alcañiz JA, Haege S, Mueller W. 2011. Cxcr7 controls

neuronal migration by regulating chemokine responsive-

ness. Neuron 69:77–90.

- Shah NM, Groves AK, Anderson DJ. 1996. Alternative neural crest cell fates are instructively promoted by TGF beta superfamily members. Cell 85:331–343.
- Sun Y, Nadal-Vicens M, Misono S, et al. 2001. Neurogenin promotes neurogenesis and inhibits glial differentiation by independent mechanisms. Cell 104:365–376.
- Wang Y, Li G, Stanco A, et al. 2011. CXCR4 and CXCR7 have distinct functions in regulating interneuron migration. Neuron 69:61–76.
- Zeng H, Sanes JR. 2017. Neuronal cell-type classification: challenges, opportunities and the path forward. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:530–546.

10/12/20 8:25 AM

## The Growth and Guidance of Axons

## Differences Between Axons and Dendrites Emerge Early in Development

Dendrites Are Patterned by Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors

The Growth Cone Is a Sensory Transducer and a Motor Structure

Molecular Cues Guide Axons to Their Targets

The Growth of Retinal Ganglion Axons Is Oriented in a Series of Discrete Steps

Growth Cones Diverge at the Optic Chiasm

Gradients of Ephrins Provide Inhibitory Signals in the Brain

Axons From Some Spinal Neurons Are Guided Across the Midline

Netrins Direct Developing Commissural Axons Across the Midline

Chemoattractant and Chemorepellent Factors Pattern the Midline

## Highlights

I n the two preceding chapters, we saw how neurons are generated in appropriate numbers, at correct times, and in the right places. These early developmental steps set the stage for later events that direct neurons to form functional connections with tar -get cells. To form connections, neurons have to extend long processes—axons and dendrites—which permit connectivity with postsynaptic cells and synaptic input from other neurons. In this chapter, we examine how neurons elaborate axons and dendrites and how axons are guided to their targets.

We begin the chapter by discussing how certain neuronal processes become axons and others dendrites. We then describe the growing axon, which may have to travel a long distance and ignore many inappropriate neuronal partners before terminating in just the right region and recognizing its correct synaptic targets. We consider the strategies by which the axon overcomes these challenges. Finally, we illustrate general features of axonal guidance by describing the development of two well-studied axonal pathways: one that conveys visual information from the retina to the brain and another that conveys cutaneous sensory information from the spinal cord to the brain.

## Differences Between Axons and Dendrites Emerge Early in Development

The processes of neurons vary enormously in their length, thickness, branching pattern, and molecular architecture. Nonetheless, most neuronal processes fit into one of two functional categories: axons and dendrites. More than a century ago, Santiago Ramón y Cajal hypothesized that this distinction underlies the ability of neurons to transmit information in a particular direction, an idea he formalized as the law of dynamic polarization. Cajal wrote that "the transmission of the nerve impulse is always from the dendritic branches and the cell body to the axon." In the decades before electrophysiological methods were up to the task, this law provided a means of analyzing neural circuits histologically. Although exceptions have been found, Ramón y Cajal's law remains a basic principle that relates structure to function in the nervous system and highlights the importance of knowing how neurons acquire their polarized form.

Progress in understanding how neuronal polarization occurs comes in large part from studies of neurons taken from the rodent brain and grown in tissue culture. Hippocampal neurons grown in isolation develop processes reminiscent of those seen in vivo: a single, long, cylindrical axon and several shorter, tapered dendrites (Figure 47–1A). As cytoskeletal and synaptic proteins are differentially targeted to these components, axons and dendrites acquire distinctive molecular profiles. For example, a particular form of the Tau protein is localized in axons and the MAP2 protein in dendrites (Figure 47–1B)

Cultured neurons are especially useful for developmental studies because they initially show no obvious sign of polarization and acquire their specialized features gradually in a stereotyped sequence of cellular steps. This sequence begins with extension of several short processes, each equivalent to the others. Soon thereafter, one process is established as an axon and the remaining processes acquire dendritic features (Figure 47–1A).

How does this occur? Cytoskeletal proteins that maintain elongated processes and drive growth are central to this process. If the actin filaments in an early neurite are destabilized, the cytoskeleton becomes reconfigured in a way that commits the neurite to becoming the axon; secondarily, the remaining neurites react by becoming dendrites. If the nascent axon is removed, one of the remaining neurites quickly assumes an axonal character. This sequence suggests that axonal specification is a key event in neuronal polarization and that signals from newly formed axons both suppress the generation of additional axons and promote dendrite formation.

The nature of the axonally derived signal that represses other axons is not known, but some insight into signals that control cytoskeletal arrangements has come from the study of a group of proteins encoded by the Par complex genes. As first shown in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, Par proteins are involved in diverse aspects of cytoskeletal reorganization, including the polarization of neuronal processes. Mammalian forebrain neurons lacking Par3 , Par4 , Par6 , or relatives of Par1 grow multiple processes that are intermediate in length between axons and dendrites and bear markers of both processes (Figure 47–1B).

Although neurons grown in culture are similar to those in the brain, they are deprived of key extrinsic cues and signals. Cultured neurons become randomly arranged with respect to each other, whereas in many regions of the developing brain, neurons line up in rows, with their dendrites pointing in the same direction (Figure 47–2A). As the neurons migrate to their destinations (Chapter 46), axons and dendrites often grow as extensions of their trailing and leading processes, respectively. This difference in vivo and in vitro implies that extrinsic signals regulate the polarization machinery. In the developing brain, the local release of semaphorins and other axonal guidance factors, discussed later in the chapter, may help to orient dendrites (Figure 47–2C). The job of the Par protein complex is to link these extracellular signals to the cellular machinery that rearranges the cytoskeleton, a process achieved in part through the regulation of proteins that modify actin or tubulin function. In fact, both the Tau protein in axons and the MAP2 protein in dendrites associate with and affect microtubules. Cytoskeletal differences also contribute to other mechanisms that amplify distinctions between axons and dendrites, such as polarized trafficking of molecules and generation of a specialized initial segment in axons.

If local signals are needed to polarize neurons in the brain, how is polarity established in the uniform environment of a tissue culture? One possible explanation is that minor variations in the intensity of signaling within a neuron, or in signals from its immediate environment, will activate Par proteins in one small domain of the neuron, triggering the nearest cell process to become an axon. If, by happenstance, one process grows slightly faster than its neighbors or encounters an environment that speeds neurite extension (Figure 47–2B), its chances of becoming an axon increase markedly. Presumably, this proto-axonal process emits signals that decrease the chance of other processes following suit, forcing them to become dendrites.

## Dendrites Are Patterned by Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors

Once polarization occurs, dendrites grow and mature, acquiring the structural features that distinguish them from axons. Nascent dendrites form branched arbors, with their branches generally being more numerous and closer to the cell body than those of axons. In addition, small protrusions called spines extend from the distal branches of many dendrites. Finally, some dendritic branches are retracted or "pruned" to give the arbor its final and definitive shape (Figure 47–3).

Although the core features of dendrite formation are common to many neurons, there is striking variation in their number, shape, and branching pattern among neuronal types. Indeed, the shape of dendritic arbors is one of the main ways in which neurons can A. Four stages in the polarization of a hippocampal neuron grown in tissue culture. (Adapted, with permission, from Kaech and Banker 2006. Copyright © 2007 Springer Nature.)

Other neurites become dendrites Stage 4

<!-- image -->

Figure 47–1 The differentiation of axons and dendrites marks the emergence of neuronal polarity.

B. Hippocampal neurons grown in culture possess multiple short, thick dendrites that are enriched in the microtubuleassociated protein MAP2. They also possess a single long axon that is marked by a dephosphorylated form of the microtubuleassociated protein tau (left). A cultured neuron isolated from a mutant mouse lacks expression of a Par family gene (SAD kinase). The neuron generates neurites that express both tau and MAP2, markers of axons and dendrites, respectively. The length and diameter of these neurites are intermediate in size between those of axons and dendrites (right). (Reproduced, with permission, from Kishi et al. 2005.)

Figure 47–2 Extracellular factors determine whether neuronal processes become axons or dendrites.

<!-- image -->

- A. Cortical pyramidal neurons in vivo display a common axonal and dendritic orientation.
- B. Neurons growing on laminin acquire polarity. When a cortical neuron extends a process from a less attractive substrate onto laminin, the process grows faster and usually becomes an axon. (Image reproduced, with permission, from Paul Letourneau.)

C. In the developing neocortex, semaphorin-3A (Sema 3A) is secreted by cells near the pial surface. Semaphorin-3A is an attractant for growing dendrites, helping to establish neuronal polarity and orientation. The parallel orientation of cortical pyramidal neurons is disrupted in mutant mice lacking functional semaphorin-3A. (Reproduced, with permission, from Polleux, Morrow, and Ghosh 2000. Copyright © 2000 Springer Nature.)

Figure 47–3 Dendritic branching develops in a series of steps.  The outgrowth of dendrites involves the formation of elaborate branches from which spines develop. Certain

<!-- image -->

be classified. Cerebellar Purkinje cells can be distinguished from granule cells, spinal motor neurons, and hippocampal pyramidal neurons simply by looking at the pattern of their dendrites. These variations are critical for the distinct functions of different neuronal types. For example, the size of a dendritic arbor and the density of its branches are main determinants of the number of synapses it receives.

How is dendritic pattern established? Neurons must have intrinsic information about their shape because the patterns in tissue culture are strikingly reminiscent of those in vivo (Figure 47–4). The transcriptional programs that specify neuronal subtype (Chapter 46) presumably also encode information about neuronal shape. In both invertebrates and vertebrates, some transcription factors are selectively expressed by specific neuronal types and appear to be devoted to controlling the size, shape, and complexity of their dendritic arbors. They do so by coordinating the expression of downstream genes, including those encoding components of the cytoskeletal apparatus and membrane proteins that mediate interactions with neighboring cells.

A second mechanism for establishing the pattern of dendritic arbors is the recognition of one dendrite by others of the same cell. In some neurons, dendrites are spaced evenly with respect to each other, an arrangement that allows them to sample inputs efficiently without major gaps or clumps (Figure 47–5A). In many cases, this process, called self-avoidance, occurs branches and spines are later pruned to achieve the mature pattern of dendrite arborization. (Image of spines at right reproduced, with permission, from Stefan W. Hell.)

through a mechanism in which branches belonging to the same neuron repel each other. Several cell-surface adhesion molecules have now been found that medi -ate self-avoidance by interacting in a way that results in repulsion (Figure 47–5D). Although it seems counterintuitive that an adhesive interaction between adjacent membranes would lead to repulsion rather than attachment, the consequences of most intercellular interactions are determined by the signaling they initiate rather than by adhesion per se, as we will see later in this chapter.

The dendrites of neighboring neurons also provide cues. In many cases, the dendrites of a particular neuron type cover a surface with minimal overlap, a spacing pattern called tiling (Figure 47–5B). The tiling of dendrites is conceptually related to self-avoidance, but in tiling, the inhibitory dendritic interactions are among neurons of a particular type, whereas in self-avoidance, they are among sibling dendrites of a single neuron. Tiling allows each class of neuron to receive information from the entire surface or area it innervates. Tiling of a region by the dendrites of one class of neuron also avoids the confusion that could arise if the dendrites of many different neurons occupied the same area.

A particularly interesting situation is one in which dendrites engage in self-avoidance but synapse on the dendrites of other cells of the same type. In this situation, dendrites face the challenging task of distinguishing nominally identical dendrites from dendrites of In the brain Grown in culture nominally identical cells (Figure 47–5C). Two groups of molecules have been identified that mediate this self-/non–self-discrimination: clustered protocadherins in mammals and DS-CAMs in Drosophila. Although they are unrelated structurally, they share several features (Figure 47–5D).

Figure 47–4 The morphologies of neurons are preserved in dissociated cell culture. Cerebellar Purkinje neurons and hippocampal pyramidal neurons have distinctive patterns of dendritic branching. These basic patterns are recapitulated when these two classes of neurons are isolated and grown in dissociated cell culture. (Image upper left: Dr. David Becker; upper right reproduced, with permission, from Yoshio Hirabayashi; lower left reproduced, with permission, from Terry E. Robinson; lower right reproduced, with permission, from Kelsey Martin.)

Purkinje cell

Pyramidal cell

<!-- image -->

dendrites of each neuron in a population bind homophilically to sibling dendrites, leading to repulsion and self-avoidance, whereas they bind poorly to dendrites of neighboring neurons, enabling other recognition systems to foster synaptogenesis.

First, both are encoded by large, complex genes that generate large numbers of isoforms. Drosophila Dscam1 encodes around 38,000 distinct proteins through alternative splicing, and the clustered protocadherins encode around 60 proteins that can assemble into thousands of distinct multimers. Second, nearly all of the isoforms bind homophilically; for example, protocadherin γa1 on the surface of one dendrite binds well to protocadherin γa1 on a neighboring membrane, but poorly if at all to other isoforms. Third, in ways that remain incompletely understood, each neuron within a population expresses a random subset of all possible Dscam1 or protocadherin isoforms. Given the large number of isoforms, it is unlikely that individual neurons express identical sets of isoforms on their cell surface. The upshot is that Together, the mechanisms we have described, and many others, establish an overall arborization pattern through a combination of intrinsic and extracellular mechanisms. For dendrites, the extrinsic patterning signals determine neuronal morphology. For axons, which we consider next, the signals guide the axons to their targets.

## The Growth Cone Is a Sensory Transducer and a Motor Structure

Once an axon forms, it begins to grow toward its synaptic target. The key neuronal element responsible for axonal growth is a specialized structure at the tip of the axon called the growth cone. Both axons and dendrites A. Self-avoidance among sibling dendrites leads to even spacing of branches, minimizing gaps and clumps. In retinal starburst amacrine cells, self-avoidance fails when gamma protocadherins are lost.

Figure 47–5 Interactions among dendritic branches pattern dendritic arbors.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

B. Tiling of dendrites is conceptually similar to self-avoidance but applies to groups of neurons. It ensures that neighboring neurons of a single type cover territory efficiently.

use growth cones for elongation, but those linked to axons have been studied more intensively.

Ramón y Cajal discovered the growth cone and had the key insight that it was responsible for axonal pathfinding. With static images alone for inspiration (Figure 47–6A), he envisioned the growth cone to be "endowed DSCAM1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- C. Self-/non-self–discrimination allows sibling dendrites to avoid each other while interacting freely with dendrites of other neurons of the same type.
- D. Generation of numerous adhesion molecules from a single genomic complex by promoter choice at the mouse clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) locus (left) and by alternative splicing at the Drosophila DSCAM1 locus (right).

with exquisite chemical sensitivity, rapid ameboid movements and a certain motive force, thanks to which it is able to proceed forward and overcome obstacles met in its way . . . until it reaches its destination."

Many studies over the past century have confirmed Ramón y Cajal's intuition. We now know
Figure 47–5 Interactions among dendritic branches pattern dendritic arbors.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

A. Self-avoidance among sibling dendrites leads to even spacing of branches, minimizing gaps and clumps. In retinal starburst amacrine cells, self-avoidance fails when gamma protocadherins are lost.

B. Tiling of dendrites is conceptually similar to self-avoidance but applies to groups of neurons. It ensures that neighboring neurons of a single type cover territory efficiently.

use growth cones for elongation, but those linked to axons have been studied more intensively.

Ramón y Cajal discovered the growth cone and had the key insight that it was responsible for axonal pathfinding. With static images alone for inspiration (Figure 47–6A), he envisioned the growth cone to be "endowed DSCAM1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- C. Self-/non-self–discrimination allows sibling dendrites to avoid each other while interacting freely with dendrites of other neurons of the same type.
- D. Generation of numerous adhesion molecules from a single genomic complex by promoter choice at the mouse clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) locus (left) and by alternative splicing at the Drosophila DSCAM1 locus (right).

with exquisite chemical sensitivity, rapid ameboid movements and a certain motive force, thanks to which it is able to proceed forward and overcome obstacles met in its way . . . until it reaches its destination."

Many studies over the past century have confirmed Ramón y Cajal's intuition. We now know

A

<!-- image -->

Figure 47–6 Neuronal growth cones.

<!-- image -->

A. Drawings of growth cones by Santiago Ramón y Cajal, who discovered these cellular structures and inferred their function.

B. Growth cones visualized in dye-labeled retinal ganglion neurons in the mouse. Note the similarities with Cajal's drawings. (Reproduced, with permission, from Carol Mason and Pierre Godement.)

- C. The three main domains of the growth cone—filopodia, lamellipodia, and a central core—are shown by whole-mount

that the growth cone is both a sensory structure that receives directional cues from the environment and a motor structure whose activity drives axon elongation. Ramón y Cajal also pondered "what mysterious forces precede the appearance of these processes . . . promote their growth and ramification . . . and finally establish those protoplasmic kisses . . . which seem to constitute the final ecstasy of an epic love story." In more modern

B

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

scanning electron microscopy. (Reproduced, with permission, from Bridgman and Dailey 1989. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)

D. The growth cone of a neuron from Aplysia in which actin and tubulin have been visualized. Actin (purple) is concentrated in lamellipodia and filopodia, whereas tubulin and microtubules (aquamarine) are concentrated in the central core. (Reproduced, with permission, from Paul Forscher and Dylan Burnette.)

and prosaic terms, we now know that the growth cone guides the axon by transducing positive and negative cues into signals that regulate the cytoskeleton, thereby determining the course and rate of axonal growth toward its targets, where it will form synapses.

Growth cones have three main compartments. Their central core is rich in microtubules, mitochondria, and other organelles. Long slender extensions called filopodia project from the body of the growth cone. Between the filopodia lie lamellipodia, which are also motile and give the growth cone its characteristic ruffled appearance (Figure 47–6C,D).

Growth cones sense environmental signals through their filopodia: rod-like, actin-rich, membrane-limited structures that are highly motile. Their surface membranes bear receptors for the molecules that serve as directional cues for the axon. Their length—tens of micrometers in some cases—permits the filopodia to sample environments far in advance of the central core of the growth core. Their rapid movements permit them to compile a detailed inventory of the environment, and their flexibility permits them to navigate around cells and other obstacles.

When filopodia encounter signals in the environment, the growth cone is stimulated to advance, retract, or turn. Several motors power these orienting behaviors. One source of power is the movement of actin along myosin, an interaction similar to the one that powers the contraction of skeletal muscle fibers, although the actin and myosin of neurons are different from those in muscle. The assembly of actin monomers into polymeric filaments also contributes a propulsive force for filopodial extension. As the actin filaments are constantly depolymerized at the base of filopodia, the balance of polymerization and depolymerization enables the filopodia to move forward without becoming longer. Depolymerization slows during periods of growth cone advance, leading to greater net forward motion. The movement of membranes along the substrate provides yet another source of forward motion.

The contribution of each type of molecular motor to the advance of the growth cone is likely to vary from one situation to another. Nevertheless, the final step involves the flow of microtubules from the central core of the growth cone into the newly extended tip, thus moving the growth cone ahead and leaving in its wake a new segment of axon. New lamellipodia and filopodia form in the advancing growth cone and the cycle repeats (Figure 47–7).

Accurate pathfinding can occur only if the growth cone's motor action is linked to its sensory function. Therefore, it is crucial that the recognition proteins on the filopodia are signal-inducing receptors and not merely binding moieties that mediate adhesion. The binding of a ligand to its receptor affects growth in diverse ways. In some cases, it engages the cytoskeleton directly, through the intracellular domain of receptors (Figure 47–7). Integrin receptors couple to actin in growth cones when they bind molecules associated with the surface of adjoining cells or the extracellular matrix, thereby influencing motility.

Of equal if not greater importance is the ability of ligand binding to stimulate the formation, accumulation, and even breakdown of soluble intracel -lular molecules that function as second messengers. These second messengers affect the organization of the cytoskeleton, and in this way regulate the direction and rate of movement of the growth cone.

One important second messenger is calcium. The calcium concentration in growth cones is regulated by the activation of receptors on filopodia, and this affects the organization of the cytoskeleton, which in turn modulates motility. Growth cone motility is optimal within a narrow range of calcium concentrations, called a set point. Activation of filopodia on one side of the growth cone leads to a concentration gradient of calcium across the growth cone, providing a possible basis for changes in the direction of growth.

Other second messengers that link receptors and motor molecules include cyclic nucleotides, which modulate the activity of enzymes such as protein kinases, protein phosphatases, and rho-family guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases). In turn, these messengers and enzymes regulate the activity of proteins that regulate the polymerization and depolymerization of actin filaments, thereby promoting or inhibiting axonal extension.

The critical role of intracellular signals in growth cone motility and orientation can be demonstrated using embryonic neurons grown in culture. Application of growth factors to one side of a growth cone activates receptors locally and leads to extension and turning of the growth cone toward the source of the signal. In essence, the factor attracts the growth cone. Yet when cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels in the neuron are decreased, the same stimulus acts as a repellent and the growth cone turns away from the signal (Figure 47–8A). Other repulsive factors can become attractive when levels of the second mes -senger cyclic guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) are raised.

Recently, another mechanism for coupling guidance molecules to growth cone behavior has come to light. It was long thought that all neuronal protein synthesis occurs in the cell body, but we now know that growth cones (as well as some dendrites) contain the machinery for protein synthesis, including a subset of messenger RNAs. Initial evidence that these molecules play an important role came from experiments in which axons were severed from their parent cell body. The growth cones continued to advance for a few hours; they could be stimulated to turn toward or away from local depots of guidance molecules, and these behaviors were abolished by inhibitors of protein A. A filopodium contacts an adhesive cue and contracts, thus pulling the growth cone forward (1). Actin filaments assemble at the leading edge of a filopodium and disassemble at the trailing edge, interacting with myosin along the way (2). Actin polymerization pushes the filopodium forward (3). Force generated by the retrograde flow of actin pushes the filopodium forward. Exocytosis adds membrane to the leading edge of the synthesis. The local protein synthesis is regulated by second messengers produced in response to activation of guidance receptors on the growth cones (Figure 47–8). This mechanism leads to synthesis of new motor filopodium and supplies new adhesion receptors to maintain traction. Membrane is recovered at the back of the filopodium. The actin polymer is linked to adhesion molecules on the plasma membrane.

Figure 47–7 The growth cone advances under the control of cellular motors. (Adapted, with permission, from Heidemann 1996. Copyright © 1996 Academic Press Inc.)

<!-- image -->

- B. The combined action of these motors creates an actindepleted space that is filled by the advance of microtubules from the central core.

C. Individual microtubules condense to form a thick bundle, and the cytoplasm collapses around them to create a new segment of axonal shaft.

proteins precisely when and where they are needed. Thus, the growth cone has many strategies and mechanisms for integrating molecular signals to direct the axon in specific directions.

A

Figure 47–8 Changes in the level of intracellular regulatory proteins can determine whether the same extrinsic cue attracts or repels the growth cone.

<!-- image -->

A. The state of protein kinase A (PKA) activity can alter the growth cone's response to an extracellular orienting factor, in this instance, the protein netrin. When PKA activity and intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels are low, the growth cone is repelled by netrin. When PKA activity is high, the resulting elevation in intracellular cAMP causes

## Molecular Cues Guide Axons to Their Targets

For much of the 20th century, a debate raged between advocates of two very different views of how growth cones navigate embryonic terrains to reach their targets. A molecular view of axonal guidance was first articulated at the turn of the 20th century by the physiologist J. N. Langley. But by the 1930s, many eminent biologists, including Paul Weiss, believed that axonal outgrowth was essentially random and that appropriate connections persisted largely because of the growth cone to be attracted to a local source of netrin. (Adapted, with permission, from Ming et al. 1997.)

- B. Netrin activation of growth cone receptors (deleted in colon cancer, DCC) leads to local synthesis of actin, which leads to turning.
- C. Immunohistochemical analysis of a growth cone showing local synthesis of actin in response to local application of netrin. (Reproduced, with permission, from Christine Holt. Adapted, with permission, from Leung et al. 2006.)

productive, matching patterns of electrical activity in the axon and its target cell.

In our molecular age, Weiss's ideas may seem simplistic, but they were not unreasonable at the time. In tissue culture, axons grow preferentially along mechanical discontinuities (scratches and bumps on a cover slip), and embryonic nerve trunks often align themselves with solid supports (blood vessels or cartilage). It seemed logical to Weiss that mechanical guidance, called stereotropism, could account for axonal patterning. Today, we are quite comfortable with the idea that electrical signals can be used to change the way current flows in a computer without the need to resolder connections. Likewise, patterns of activity and experience can strengthen or weaken neural connections without requiring the formation of new axonal pathways. Then why not consider that congruent activity, called resonance by Weiss, is involved in establishing appropriate connections?

Today, few scientists believe that stereotaxis or resonance is a crucial force in initial patterning of neuronal circuits. The tipping point that shifted opinion in favor of the molecular view was an experiment performed with frogs and other amphibia in the 1940s by Roger Sperry (ironically, a student of Weiss). Sperry manipulated the information carried from the eye to the brain by the axons of retinal ganglion cells. These axons terminate in their target areas—the lateral geniculate body in the thalamus and the superior colliculus (called optic tectum in lower vertebrates) in the midbrain—in such a way that an orderly retinotopic map of the visual field is created.

Because of the optics of the eye, the visual image on the retina is an inversion of the visual field. The retinal ganglion cells reinvert the image by the pattern in which their axons terminate in the optic tectum, the main visual center in the brain of frogs (Figure 47–9A). If the optic nerve is cut, the animal is blinded. In lower vertebrates, cut retinal axons can reestablish projections to the tectum, whereupon vision is restored. This is not the case in mammals, as we will discuss in Chapter 50.

Sperry's key experiment was to sever the optic nerve in a frog and then rotate the eye in its socket by 180° before regeneration of the nerve. Remarkably, the frog exhibited orderly responses to visual input, but the behavior was wrong. When the frog was presented with a fly on the ground, it jumped up, and when offered a fly above its head, it struck downward (Figure 47–9B). Importantly, the animal never learned to correct its mistakes. Sperry suggested—and later verified with anatomical and physiological methods— that the retinal axons had reinnervated their original tectal targets, even though these connections provided the brain with erroneous spatial information that led to aberrant behavior. The inference of these experiments was that recognition between axons and their targets relied on molecular matching rather than functional validation and refinement of random connections.

But Weiss's ideas are by no means obsolete. Indeed, we now recognize that the activity of neural circuits can play a crucial role in shaping connectivity. The current view is that molecular matching predominates during embryonic development and that activity and experience modify circuits after they have formed. In this chapter and the next, we describe the molecular cues that guide the formation of neural connections, and then in Chapter 49, we examine the role of activity and experience in the fine-tuning of synaptic connections.

Sperry's conjecture, often called the chemospecificity hypothesis, prompted developmental neurobiologists to search for axonal and synaptic "recognition molecules." Success was limited for the first few dec -ades, in part because these molecules are present in small amounts and on discrete subsets of neurons and there were no effective methods for isolating rare molecules from complex tissues. Eventually advances in biochemical and molecular-biological methods made this task more feasible, and many proteins involved in the guidance of axons to their targets have now been discovered. These proteins typically consist of paired ligands and receptors: The ligands are presented by cells along the pathway an axon follows and the receptors by the growth cone itself.

In the most general terms, guidance cues can be presented on cell surfaces, in the extracellular matrix, or in soluble form. As described above (Figure 47–8), they interact with receptors embedded in the growth cone membrane to promote or inhibit outgrowth of the axon. Most receptors have an extracellular domain that selectively binds the cognate ligand and an intracellular domain that couples to the cytoskeleton, either directly or through intermediates such as second messengers. The ligands can speed or slow growth. Ligands presented to one side of the growth cone can result in local activation or inhibition, leading to turning. In this way, the local distribution of environmental cues determines the pathway of the advancing growth cone.

As a result of these recent discoveries, axon guidance—a process that appeared mysterious years ago—can now be viewed as the orderly consequence of protein–protein interactions that instruct the growth cone to grow, turn, branch, or stop (Figures 47–10, 11). This limited set of instructions is sufficient, when presented with spatial precision, to choreograph growth cone behaviors with exquisite subtlety. Axonal guidance can therefore be explained by describing how and where ligands are presented and how the growth cone integrates this information to generate an orderly response. In the rest of the chapter, we illustrate lessons learned by describing the journeys of two types of axons: those of retinal ganglion neurons and those of a particular class of sensory relay neurons in the spinal cord.

Figure 47–9 Roger Sperry's classical experiments on regeneration in the visual system provided evidence for chemoaffinity in the wiring of connections.

<!-- image -->

A. In the visual system of the frog, the lens projects an inverted visual image onto the retina and the optic nerve then transfers the image, with an additional inversion, to the optic tectum. The spatial arrangement of retinal inputs to the tectum allows for this transfer. Neurons in the anterior retina project axons to the posterior tectum, while neurons in the posterior retina project to the anterior tectum. Similarly, neurons in the dorsal retina project to the ventral tectum, and neurons in the ventral

## The Growth of Retinal Ganglion Axons Is Oriented in a Series of Discrete Steps

Sperry's experiment implied the existence of axon guidance cues but did not reveal where they were or how they worked. For a time, one prominent view was that recognition occurred mostly at or near the target and that mechanical forces or long-range retina project to the dorsal tectum. As a result, visually guided behaviors (here catching a fly) are accurate. (Abbreviations: A , B. If the optic nerve is cut and the eye is surgically rotated in its socket before the nerve regenerates, visually guided behavior is aberrant. When a fly is presented overhead, the frog perceives it as below, and vice versa. The inversion of behavioral reflexes results from the connection of regenerating retinal axons to their original targets, even though these connections now transfer an inverted, inappropriate map of the world into the brain.

anterior; D, dorsal; P, posterior; V, ventral.)

chemotactic factors sufficed to get axons to the vicinity of the target.

We now know that axons reach distant targets in a series of discrete steps, making frequent decisions at closely spaced intervals along their route. To illustrate this point, we shall trace in greater detail the path that Sperry was trying to understand, that of a retinal axon growing to the optic tectum.

## 1 Extracellular matrix adhesion

<!-- image -->

- 2 Cell surface adhesion
- 3 Fasciculation
- 4 Chemoattraction

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 47–10 Extracellular cues use a variety of mechanisms to guide growth cones.  The axon can interact with growth-promoting molecules in the extracellular matrix (1). It can interact with adhesive cell-surface molecules on neural cells (2). The growing axon can encounter another axon from a "pioneer" neuron and track along it, a process termed

<!-- image -->

## 5 Contact inhibition

<!-- image -->

- 6 Chemorepulsion
- 7 Collateral branching
- 8 Terminal branching

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

fasciculation (3). Soluble chemical signals can attract the growing axon to its cellular source (4). Intermediate target cells that express cell-surface repellent cues can cause the axon to turn away (5). Soluble chemical signals can repel the growing axon (6). Extracellular signals also lead to formation of collaterals from axon shafts (7) or branching of the growing axon (8).

<!-- image -->

## Growth Cones Diverge at the Optic Chiasm

The first task of the axon of a retinal ganglion cell is to leave the retina. As it enters the optic fiber layer, it extends along the basal lamina and glial end-feet at the retina's edge. The growth of the axon is oriented from the outset, indicating that it can read directional cues in the environment. As it approaches the center of the retina, it comes under the influence of attractants ema -nating from the optic nerve head (the junction of the optic nerve with the retina proper), which guide it into the optic stalk. It then follows the optic nerve toward the brain (Figure 47–12).

The first axons to travel this route follow the cells of the optic stalk, the rudiment of the neural tube that connects the retina to the diencephalon from which it arose. These "pioneer" axons then serve as scaffolds for later-arriving axons, which are able to extend accurately simply by following their predecessors (see "fasciculation" in Figure 47–10). Once they reach the optic chiasm, however, the retinal axons must make a choice. Axons that arise from neurons in the nasal hemiretina of each eye cross the chiasm and proceed to the opposite side of the brain, whereas those from the temporal half are deflected as they reach the chiasm and so stay on the same side of the brain (Figure 47–13A).

This divergence in trajectory reflects the differential responses of axons from the nasal and temporal

## Figure 47–11 (Opposite) Diverse molecular families control the growth and guidance of developing axons.

A. A large family of classical cadherins promote cell and axonal adhesion, primarily through homophilic interactions between cadherin molecules on adjacent neurons. Adhesive interactions are mediated through interactions of the extracellular EC1 domains. Cadherins transduce adhesive interactions though their cytoplasmic interactions with catenins, which link cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton.

B. A diverse array of immunoglobulin superfamily proteins are expressed in the nervous system and mediate adhesive interactions. The three examples shown here, NCAM, L1, and TAG1, can bind both homophilically and heterophilically to promote axon outgrowth and adhesion. These proteins contain both immunoglobulin domains (circles) and fibronectin type III domains (squares). Homophilic interactions typically involve amino terminal immunoglobulin domains. Different immunoglobulin adhesion molecules interact with the cytoskeleton via diverse cytoplasmic mediators, only a few of which are shown here.

C. Different ephrin proteins bind to Eph class tyrosine kinase receptors. Class A ephrins are linked to the surface membrane through a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol tether, whereas class B ephrins are transmembrane proteins. Class A ephrins typically bind class A Eph kinases, and class B ephrins typically bind hemiretinas to guidance cues presented by midline chiasm cells. Some retinal axons contact and traverse chiasm cells, whereas others are inhibited by these cells and deflected away, thus remaining on the ipsilateral side. One of the key molecules presented by chiasm cells is a membrane-bound repellent of the ephrin-B family (Figure 47–13B), which also figures in later steps of retinal ganglion cell axon guidance.

The fraction of temporal retinal axons that project ipsilaterally varies among species: few in lower vertebrates, some in rodents, and many in humans. These differences reflect placement of the eyes. In many animals, the eyes point to the sides and monitor different parts of the visual world, so that information from the two eyes need not be combined. In humans, both eyes look forward and sample largely overlapping regions of the visual world, so coordination of visual input is essential.

After crossing the optic chiasm, retinal axons assemble in the optic tract along the ventral surface of the diencephalon. Axons then leave the tract at different points. In most vertebrate species, the tectum of the midbrain (called the superior colliculus in mammals) is the major target of retinal axons, but a small number of axons project to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. In humans, however, most axons project to the lateral geniculate, a sizable number reach the

class B Eph kinases. Forward Eph signaling usually elicits repellant or inhibitory responses in receptive cells, whereas reverse ephrin signaling can elicit adhesive or inhibitory responses. Ephrin-Eph signaling involves many different cytoplasmic mediators.

- D. Laminin proteins are components of the extracellular matrix and promote cell adhesion and axon extension through interactions with integrin receptors. Integrins mediate adhesion and axon growth through interactions with the cytoskeleton via many intermediary proteins.
- E. Semaphorin proteins can promote or inhibit axonal growth through interaction with a diverse array of plexin and neuropilin receptors, which transduce signals via Rho class GTPases and downstream kinases.
- F. Slit proteins typically mediate repellant responses through interaction with Robo class receptors, which influence axonal growth via intermediary GTPases such as Rac.
- G. The secreted or extracellular matrix–associated netrin proteins mediate both chemoattractant and chemorepellent responses. Attractant responses are mediated through interaction with DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) receptors, whereas repellent responses involve interactions with DCC and unc-5 coreceptors. Netrin receptors signal via GTPases and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) cascades.
## Growth Cones Diverge at the Optic Chiasm

The first task of the axon of a retinal ganglion cell is to leave the retina. As it enters the optic fiber layer, it extends along the basal lamina and glial end-feet at the retina's edge. The growth of the axon is oriented from the outset, indicating that it can read directional cues in the environment. As it approaches the center of the retina, it comes under the influence of attractants ema -nating from the optic nerve head (the junction of the optic nerve with the retina proper), which guide it into the optic stalk. It then follows the optic nerve toward the brain (Figure 47–12).

The first axons to travel this route follow the cells of the optic stalk, the rudiment of the neural tube that connects the retina to the diencephalon from which it arose. These "pioneer" axons then serve as scaffolds for later-arriving axons, which are able to extend accurately simply by following their predecessors (see "fasciculation" in Figure 47–10). Once they reach the optic chiasm, however, the retinal axons must make a choice. Axons that arise from neurons in the nasal hemiretina of each eye cross the chiasm and proceed to the opposite side of the brain, whereas those from the temporal half are deflected as they reach the chiasm and so stay on the same side of the brain (Figure 47–13A).

This divergence in trajectory reflects the differential responses of axons from the nasal and temporal

## Figure 47–11 (Opposite) Diverse molecular families control the growth and guidance of developing axons.

A. A large family of classical cadherins promote cell and axonal adhesion, primarily through homophilic interactions between cadherin molecules on adjacent neurons. Adhesive interactions are mediated through interactions of the extracellular EC1 domains. Cadherins transduce adhesive interactions though their cytoplasmic interactions with catenins, which link cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton.

B. A diverse array of immunoglobulin superfamily proteins are expressed in the nervous system and mediate adhesive interactions. The three examples shown here, NCAM, L1, and TAG1, can bind both homophilically and heterophilically to promote axon outgrowth and adhesion. These proteins contain both immunoglobulin domains (circles) and fibronectin type III domains (squares). Homophilic interactions typically involve amino terminal immunoglobulin domains. Different immunoglobulin adhesion molecules interact with the cytoskeleton via diverse cytoplasmic mediators, only a few of which are shown here.

C. Different ephrin proteins bind to Eph class tyrosine kinase receptors. Class A ephrins are linked to the surface membrane through a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol tether, whereas class B ephrins are transmembrane proteins. Class A ephrins typically bind class A Eph kinases, and class B ephrins typically bind hemiretinas to guidance cues presented by midline chiasm cells. Some retinal axons contact and traverse chiasm cells, whereas others are inhibited by these cells and deflected away, thus remaining on the ipsilateral side. One of the key molecules presented by chiasm cells is a membrane-bound repellent of the ephrin-B family (Figure 47–13B), which also figures in later steps of retinal ganglion cell axon guidance.

The fraction of temporal retinal axons that project ipsilaterally varies among species: few in lower vertebrates, some in rodents, and many in humans. These differences reflect placement of the eyes. In many animals, the eyes point to the sides and monitor different parts of the visual world, so that information from the two eyes need not be combined. In humans, both eyes look forward and sample largely overlapping regions of the visual world, so coordination of visual input is essential.

After crossing the optic chiasm, retinal axons assemble in the optic tract along the ventral surface of the diencephalon. Axons then leave the tract at different points. In most vertebrate species, the tectum of the midbrain (called the superior colliculus in mammals) is the major target of retinal axons, but a small number of axons project to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. In humans, however, most axons project to the lateral geniculate, a sizable number reach the

class B Eph kinases. Forward Eph signaling usually elicits repellant or inhibitory responses in receptive cells, whereas reverse ephrin signaling can elicit adhesive or inhibitory responses. Ephrin-Eph signaling involves many different cytoplasmic mediators.

- D. Laminin proteins are components of the extracellular matrix and promote cell adhesion and axon extension through interactions with integrin receptors. Integrins mediate adhesion and axon growth through interactions with the cytoskeleton via many intermediary proteins.
- E. Semaphorin proteins can promote or inhibit axonal growth through interaction with a diverse array of plexin and neuropilin receptors, which transduce signals via Rho class GTPases and downstream kinases.
- F. Slit proteins typically mediate repellant responses through interaction with Robo class receptors, which influence axonal growth via intermediary GTPases such as Rac.
- G. The secreted or extracellular matrix–associated netrin proteins mediate both chemoattractant and chemorepellent responses. Attractant responses are mediated through interaction with DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) receptors, whereas repellent responses involve interactions with DCC and unc-5 coreceptors. Netrin receptors signal via GTPases and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) cascades.

Figure 47–12 The axons of retinal ganglion cells grow to the optic tectum in discrete steps.  Two neurons that carry information from the nasal half of the retina are shown. The axon of one crosses the optic chiasm to reach the contralateral optic tectum. The axon of the other also crosses the optic chiasm but projects to the lateral geniculate nucleus. The numbers indicate important landmarks on the axon's journey. The growing axon is directed toward the optic nerve head (the junction of the nerve with the retina) (1), enters into the optic nerve

<!-- image -->

colliculus, and small numbers project to the pulvinar, superchiasmatic nucleus, and pretectal nuclei. Within these targets, different retinal axons project to different regions. As Sperry showed, the retinal axons form a precise retinotopic map on the tectal surface. Similar maps form in other areas innervated by retinal axons such as the lateral geniculate nucleus.

Having reached an appropriate position within the tectum, retinal axons need to find an appropriate synaptic partner. To achieve this last leg of their journey, retinal axons turn and dive into the tectal neuropil (Figure 47–12), descending (or, in mammals, ascending) along the surface of radial glial cells, which provide a scaffold for radial axonal growth. Although radial glial cells span the entire extent of the neuroepithelium, each retinal axon confines its synaptic terminals to a single layer. The dendrites of many postsynaptic cells extend through multiple layers and form synapses along their entire length, but retinal inputs are restricted to a small fraction of the target neuron's dendritic tree. These organizational features imply that layer-specific cues arrest axonal elongation and trigger arborization.

The problem of long-distance axon navigation is therefore solved by dividing the journey into short segments in which intermediate targets guide the axons along the path to their final targets. Some intermediate targets, such as the optic chiasm, are "decision" regions where axons diverge.

(2), extends through the optic nerve (3), swerves to remain ipsilateral (not shown) or crosses to the contralateral side at the optic chiasm (4), extends through the optic tract (5), enters into the optic tectum or lateral geniculate nucleus (not shown) (6), navigates to an appropriate rostrocaudal and dorsoventral position on the tectum (7), turns to enter the neuropil (descends in chicks as shown here; ascends in mammals) (8), stops at an appropriate layer where a rudimentary terminal arbor is formed (9), and finally is remodeled (10). (Abbreviations: A, anterior; P, posterior).

Reliance on intermediate targets is an effective solution to the problem of long-distance axonal navigation but is not the only one. In some cases, the first axons reach their targets when the embryo is small and the distance to be covered is short. These "pioneer" axons respond to molecular cues embedded in cells or the extracellular matrix along their way. The first axons to exit the retina fall within this class. Axons that appear later, when distances are longer and obstacles more numerous, can reach their targets by following the pioneers. Yet another guidance mechanism is a molecular gradient. Indeed, as we will see, gradients of cell-surface molecules in the tectum inform axons about their proper termination zone.

## Gradients of Ephrins Provide Inhibitory Signals in the Brain

So far, we have seen how retinal axons reach the tectum by responding to a series of discrete directional cues. However, these choices during growth do not account A. A time lapse series shows axons approaching the midline. Axons that arise from the nasal hemiretina cross the optic chiasm and project to the contralateral tectum (left). In contrast, axons from the temporal hemiretina reach the chiasm but fail to cross and thus project toward the ipsilateral tectum (right). (Reproduced, with permission, from Godement, Wang, and Mason 1994.)

Figure 47–13 Axons of retinal ganglion neurons diverge as they reach the optic chiasm.

<!-- image -->

for the smoothly graded connections implied by Sperry's analysis of the retinotopic map in the tectum. The quest for the hypothetical "map molecules" became a major focus for developmental neurobiologists, and so we describe it in some detail.

A key breakthrough in the quest for these molecules came with the development of bioassays in which explants from defined portions of the retina were laid on substrates of tectal membrane fragments. The membrane fragments were taken from defined anteroposterior portions of the tectum and arranged in alternating stripes. Axons from the temporal (posterior) hemiretina were found to grow preferentially on membranes from anterior tectum, a preference similar to that exhibited in vivo (Figure 47–14). This preference was found to result from the presence of inhibitory factors in posterior membranes rather than from attractive or adhesive substances in anterior membranes. This observation

- B. The axons of neurons from the temporal hemiretina, which express the tyrosine kinase receptor EphB1, encounter ephrinB2 expressed by midline radial glial cells at the optic chiasm and so are prevented from crossing the midline. The axons of nasal hemiretina neurons, which lack EphB1 receptors, are unaffected by the presence of ephrin-B2 and cross to the contralateral side. (Abbreviations: A, anterior; P, posterior.)
- C. Higher-power view illustrating the trajectories of retinal ganglion cell axons at the chiasm.

was one of the first to demonstrate the role of inhibitory or repellent substances in axon guidance.

This stripe assay permitted the characterization of an inhibitory cue, present in membranes from the posterior but not the anterior tectum. Independently, molecular biologists identified a family of receptor tyrosine kinases, the Eph kinases, and a large family of membrane-associated ligands, the ephrins. Both receptors and ligands are divided into A and B subfamilies. The ephrin-A proteins bind and activate EphA kinases; conversely, ephrin-B proteins bind and activate EphB kinases (Figure 47–11C).

The two lines of research converged when the tectal inhibitory cue was identified as ephrin-A5. We now know that the Eph kinases and ephrins serve many functions in neural and nonneural tissues and that each class of proteins can serve as ligands or receptors, depending on cellular context. In the developing nervous system, these proteins comprise a major group of repellent signals.

<!-- image -->

Ephrin–Eph interactions account in large part for formation of the retinotopic map in the tectum. Levels of ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 in the tectum as well as levels of the Eph receptors in the retina are graded along the anteroposterior axis. These gradients run in the same direction. Ephrin-A concentrations run from posterior-high to anterior-low in tectum, while Eph A concentrations run from posterior-high to anterior-low in retina (Figure 47–15A). Such counter-gradients account, at least in part, for topographic mapping. Axons from posterior retinal ganglion cells with high levels of EphA receptors are repelled most strongly by the high level of ephrin-A in the posterior tectum and thus are confined to the anterior tectum. The less sensitive axons from the anterior retina are able to penetrate further into the posterior domain of the tectum. Ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 are therefore strong candidates for chemospecificity factors of the type postulated by Sperry.

The crucial role of the interaction of ephrins and Eph kinases in the formation of retinotopic maps has been confirmed in vivo. Overexpression of ephrin-A2 in the developing optic tectum of chick embryos generates small patches of cells in the rostral tectum that are abnormally rich in ephrin-A2. Temporal retinal axons, which normally avoid the ephrin-rich caudal tectum, also avoid these patches in the rostral tectum, and they terminate in abnormal positions. In contrast, nasal retinal axons, which normally grow toward the B Repulsion: forward signaling Wild type A A P P

<!-- image -->

EphA

EphA mutant

A A P P

Figure 47–15 The formation of retinotopic maps in vivo depends on ephrin-Eph kinase signaling.

A. In the retina, EphA receptors are expressed in an anteroposterior (A-P) gradient, and ephrin-B is expressed in a dorsoventral (D-V) gradient. In the tectum, ephrin-A receptors are distributed in an anteroposterior gradient and EphB in a dorsoventral gradient.

B. Expression of EphA in retinal axons that derive from neurons in the posterior (temporal) retina directs axon growth to

caudal tectum, are not perturbed by encounters with excess ephrin-A.

Conversely, in mice with targeted mutations in the relevant ephA or ephrin-A genes, some posterior retinal axons terminate in inappropriately posterior tectal regions (Figure 47–15B). Anterior retinal axons, which naturally express low levels of EphA proteins,

Ephrin-A

C Attraction: reverse signaling

Wild type


Ephrin-B


Ephrin-B signaling blocked







the anterior tectum through avoidance of ephrin-A proteins. In EphA mutant mice, posterior retinal axons are able to project to a more posterior domain within the tectum.

C. EphB signaling directs the projection of dorsal retinal axons to the ventral tectum. Blocking ephrin-B signaling with soluble EphB protein causes dorsal axons to project to an abnormally dorsal domain within the tectum.

project normally in these mutants. In mice lacking both ephrin-A proteins, these deficits are more severe than with either single mutant. Thus, the interaction of ephrin-A with EphA receptors is crucial for the targeting of retinal axons in the tectum. These ephrin/EphA pairs possess the properties of the recognition molecules that Sperry predicted were necessary to direct

EphB

topographic mapping along the anteroposterior axis of the tectum.

Of course, the retinal map also has a dorsoventral axis. Ephrin/EphB pairs are involved in establishing order along this axis. Just as ephrin-A and EphA are graded along the anteroposterior axis, ephrin-B and EphB are graded along the dorsoventral axis, and manipulation of ephrin-B and EphB levels affects dorsoventral mapping (Figure 47–15C). Thus, at a simple level, the retinotopic map is arranged in rectangular coordinates with ephrin-A/EphA and ephrin-B/EphB labeling the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes, respectively.

Although this simple view is satisfying, the reality is more complex. First, EphB kinases are expressed in the tectum as well as in the retina, and ephrins-A are expressed in the retina as well as in the tectum. Thus, so-called "cis" interactions (Eph and ephrin on the same cell) as well as "trans" interactions (Eph on growth cone, ephrin on target cell) may be involved. Second, both ligands and receptors are present at multiple points along the optic pathway and play multiple roles. As we have seen, ephrin-B/EphB interactions affect not only dorsoventral mapping but also the decision of an axon to cross to the contralateral side at the optic chiasm. Finally, in developing visual circuits, more precise spatial mapping of retinal inputs is regulated by patterns of neural activity, as discussed in the next two chapters. Nonetheless, we now have the outline of a molecular strategy for the initial formation of topographic projections from the eye to the brain.

## Axons From Some Spinal Neurons Are Guided Across the Midline

One of the fundamental features of the central nervous system is the need to coordinate activity on both sides of the body. To accomplish this task, certain axons need to project to the opposite side.

We have seen one example of axonal crossing in the optic chiasm. Another example that has been studied in detail is the axonal crossing of commissural neurons that convey sensory information from the spinal cord to the brain at the ventral midline of the spinal cord across the floor plate. After crossing, axons turn abruptly and grow up toward the brain. This simple trajectory raises several questions. How do these axons reach the ventral midline? How do they cross the midline, and after crossing, how do they ignore cues that axons on the other side are using to get to the midline? In other words, why do they turn toward the brain instead of crossing back?

## Netrins Direct Developing Commissural Axons Across the Midline

Many of the neurons that send axons across the ventral midline are generated in the dorsal half of the spinal cord. The first task for these axons is to reach the ventral midline. Ramón y Cajal considered the possibility that chemotactic factors emitted by targets could attract axons, but this idea lay dormant for nearly a century. We now know that such factors do exist, and one of them, the protein netrin-1, is expressed by cells of the floor plate as well as by progenitors along the ventral midline. When presented in culture, netrin attracts commissural axons; when mice are deprived of netrin-1 function, axons fail to reach the floor plate (Figure 47–16). It may act as both a secreted factor (chemotaxis) and a membrane guidance molecule (haptotaxis) to guide the axons of commissural neurons to the floor plate.

The netrin protein is structurally related to the protein product of unc-6, a gene shown to regulate axon guidance in the nematode Clostridia elegans. Two other C. elegans genes, unc-5 and unc-40, encode receptors for the unc-6 protein. Vertebrate netrin receptors are related to the unc-5 and unc-40 receptors. The unc5H proteins are homologs of unc-5, and DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) are related to unc-40 (see Figure 47–11G). These receptors are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, and their functions have been remarkably conserved throughout animal evolution (Figure 47–17). This conservation supports the use of simple and genetically accessible invertebrates to unravel developmental complexities. In no area has this approach been more fruitful than in the analysis of axon guidance. Dozens of genes that affect this process were first identified and cloned in Drosophila and C. elegans and then shown to play important and related roles in mammals.

## Chemoattractant and Chemorepellent Factors Pattern the Midline

Other signaling systems work with netrins to guide commissural axons. One group consists of bone morphogenetic proteins, which are secreted by the roof plate. They act as repellents, directing commissural axons ventrally as they begin their journey. Additional factors from the floor plate, such as the hedgehog proteins initially involved in patterning the spinal cord (Chapter 45), may collaborate with netrins at a later stage, serving as axonal attractants.

Once commissural axons reach the midline, they find themselves exposed to the highest available levels A. Netrin-1 is generated by floor plate cells and ventral neural progenitors. It attracts the axons of commissural neurons to the floor plate (FP) at the ventral midline of the spinal cord.

Figure 47–16 Netrin signaling attracts the axons of spinal commissural neurons to the floor plate. (Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from Marc Tessier-Lavigne.)

B. Most commissural axons fail to reach the floor plate when netrin or deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) proteins are eliminated.

<!-- image -->

of netrin-1 and sonic hedgehog. Yet this netrin-rich environment does not keep the axons at the midline indefinitely. Instead they cross to the other side of the spinal cord, even while their contralateral counterparts are navigating up the netrin chemoattractant gradient.

This puzzling behavior is explained by the fact that growth cones change their responsiveness to attractive and repellent signals as a consequence of exposure to floor plate signals. This switch illustrates an important property of intermediate targets involved in axon guidance. Factors presented by intermediate targets not only guide the growth of axons but also change the sensitivity of the growth cone, preparing it for the next leg of its journey.

Figure 47–17 The expression and activity of netrins have been conserved throughout evolution. Netrins are secreted by ventral midline cells in worms, flies, and vertebrates and interact with receptors on cells or axons that migrate or extend

<!-- image -->

Once axons arrive at the floor plate, they become sensitive to Slit, a chemorepellent signal secreted by floor plate cells (Figure 47–18). Before commissural axons reach the floor plate, the Robo proteins that serve as Slit receptors are kept inactive by expression of a

BMP signaling directs axons ventrally, away from the roof plate.

<!-- image -->

Netrin-DCC signaling attracts axons to the oor plate.

<!-- image -->

Figure 47–18 Guidance cues expressed by roof plate and floor plate cells guide commissural axons in the developing spinal cord.

A. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) secreted by roof plate cells interact with BMP receptors (BMPR) on commissural axons to direct the axons away from the roof plate.

B. Netrin expressed by floor plate cells attracts deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC)-expressing commissural axons to the ventral midline of the spinal cord. Sonic hedgehog has also been implicated in the ventral guidance of commissural axons.

along the dorsoventral axis. The netrin receptors unc-40 (worm), frazzled (fly), and deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) (vertebrate) mediate netrin's attractant activity, whereas unc-5 class receptors mediate its repellent activity.

related protein, Rig-1. As axons reach the floor plate, levels of Rig-1 on their surface decline, unleashing Robo activity and causing axons to respond to the repellant actions of Slit. This repellent action propels growth cones down the Slit gradient into the contralateral side

Slit interacts with Robo receptors on axons to prevent midline recrossing.

<!-- image -->

Axons turn and travel rostrally, guided by Wnts.

<!-- image -->

- C. Slit proteins secreted by floor plate cells interact with Robo receptors on commissural axons to prevent these axons from recrossing the midline. Prior to crossing, but not after, commissural axons express robo3 (Rig-1) in addition to robo1 and robo2. The Rig-1 protein inactivates the Robo receptors, preventing the axons from responding to the repellent effects of Slits as they approach the ventral midline.

D. After commissural axons cross the midline, Wnt proteins secreted from floor plate cells and distributed in a rostrocaudal gradient interact with frizzled (Fz) proteins on the commissural axons, guiding the axons toward the brain.

of the spinal cord. In addition, activated Robo forms a complex with DCC, rendering these Netrin receptors incapable of responding to their ligand. The decreased sensitivity of growth cones to the attractive properties of the floor plate helps to account for the transient influence of floor plate signals on axons.

Finally, once axons have left the floor plate, they turn rostrally toward their eventual synaptic targets in the brain. A rostrocaudal gradient of Wnt proteins expressed by floor plate cells appears to direct axon growth rostrally at the ventral midline (Figure 47–18D). Thus, different cues guide commissural axons during distinct phases of their overall trajectory. This same process is presumably played out for hundreds and even thousands of classes of neurons to establish the mature pattern of brain wiring.

## Highlights

1. As neurons extend processes, one generally becomes an axon and the others become den -drites. This process is called polarization. The two types of processes differ in structure and molecular architecture as well as function.
2. Cell types differ markedly in the shape, size, and branching patterns of their dendrites. Type-specific dendritic features arise both from intrinsic differences in transcriptional programs among types and from extrinsic influences on the developing dendrites.
3. Interactions among dendrites are critical for dendritic patterning. Repellent interactions among the dendrites of a single cell, a process called self-avoidance, leads to even coverage of an area, with minimal gaps or clumps. Repellent actions between dendrites of neighboring cells, a process called tiling, minimizes overlap of dendritic fields. In some cases, dendrites avoid other dendrites from their own neuron but interact with dendrites of nominally identical neighboring cells. This process is called self-/ non–self-discrimination.
4. Growth cones at the tips of axons serve as both sensory and motor elements to guide axons to their destinations. Cytoskeletal elements of the growth cone, including actin and myosin, propel the growth.
5. Receptors on the growth cone recognize and bind ligands in the environment through which the axon is extending, guiding the growth. These interactions lead to generation of their second messengers that mediate growth, turning and
6. stopping of the growth cone, and branching of the axon.
6. Some growth cones contain protein synthetic machinery including messenger RNAs. In these cases, receptors can promote local synthesis of specific proteins that mediate growth or turning.
7. Ligand–receptor pairs include several key families of molecules including cadherins, Slits and their Robo receptors, semaphorins and their plexin receptors, and ephrins and their Eph kinase receptors.
8. The growth of an axon to a distant target is broken into discrete shorter steps. At each step, molecules on the surface of or secreted by neighboring structures guide the axon. They can also lead to alterations in the growth cone's complement of receptors, allowing it to respond to different sets of cues at the subsequent stage.
9. Roger Sperry proposed a chemospecificity hypothesis to explain the specific growth of axons from different parts of the retina to different parts of the optic tectum (superior colliculus), forming an orderly retinotopic map. The ephrins and their receptors, the Eph kinases, are key molecules that guide map formation. They are graded in expression along the retina and tectum and act in large part by repelling axons from incorrect positions rather than attracting them to correct positions.
10. Both attractive and repellent molecules guide axons across midline structures, a process called decussation. Evolutionarily conserved signals include Slits, netrins, and Wnts. Mutations in genes that encode these ligands and receptors can result in developmental neurological disorders.

Joshua R. Sanes

## Selected Reading

- Bentley M, Banker G. 2016. The cellular mechanisms that maintain neuronal polarity. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:611–622.
- Cang J, Feldheim DA. 2013. Developmental mechanisms of topographic map formation and alignment. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:51–77.
- Dong X, Shen K, Bülow HE. 2015. Intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms of dendritic morphogenesis. Annu Rev Physiol 77:271–300.
- Herrera E, Erskine L, Morenilla-Palao C. 2017. Guidance of retinal axons in mammals. Semin Cell Dev Biol pii: S1084-9521.

- Jung H, Gkogkas CG, Sonenberg N, Holt CE. 2014. Remote control of gene function by local translation. Cell 157:26–40.
- Lai Wing Sun K, Correia JP, Kennedy TE. 2011. Netrins: versatile extracellular cues with diverse functions. Development 138:2153–2169.
- Lefebvre JL, Sanes JR, Kay JN. 2015. Development of dendritic form and function. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31:741–777.
- Tojima T, Hines JH, Henley JR, Kamiguchi H. 2011. Second messengers and membrane trafficking direct and organize growth cone steering. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:191–203.
- Zhang C, Kolodkin AL, Wong RO, James RE. 2017. Establishing wiring specificity in visual system circuits: from the retina to the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:395–424.
- Zipursky SL, Grueber WB. 2013. The molecular basis of selfavoidance. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:547–568.

## References

- Barnes AP, Lilley BN, Pan YA, et al. 2007. LKB1 and SAD kinases define a pathway required for the polarization of cortical neurons. Cell 129:549–563.
- Bridgman PC, Dailey ME. 1989. The organization of myosin and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones. J Cell Biol 108:95–109.
- Campbell DS, Holt CE. 2001. Chemotropic responses of retinal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthesis and degradation. Neuron 32:1013–1026.
- Fazeli A, Dickinson SL, Hermiston ML, et al. 1997. Phenotype of mice lacking functional Deleted in colorectal cancer (Dcc) gene. Nature 386:796–804.
- Forscher P, Smith SJ. 1988. Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone. J Cell Biol 107:1505–1516.
- Frisen J, Yates PA, McLaughlin T, Friedman GC, O'Leary DD, Barbacid M. 1998. Ephrin-A5 (AL-1/RAGS) is essential for proper retinal axon guidance and topographic mapping in the mammalian visual system. Neuron 20:235–243.
- Godement P, Wang LC, Mason CA. 1994. Retinal axon divergence in the optic chiasm: dynamics of growth cone behavior at the midline. J Neurosci 14:7024–7039.
- Grueber WB, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2003. Different levels of the homeodomain protein cut regulate distinct dendrite branching patterns of Drosophila multidendritic neurons. Cell 112:805–818.
- Harrison RG. 1959. The outgrowth of the nerve fiber as a mode of protoplasmic movement. J Exp Zool 142:5–73.
- Heidemann SR. 1996. Cytoplasmic mechanisms of axonal and dendritic growth in neurons. Int Rev Cytol 165:235–296.
- Kaech S, Banker G. 2006. Culturing hippocampal neurons. Nat Protoc 1:2406–2415.
- Kalil K, Dent EW. 2014. Branch management: mechanisms of axon branching in the developing vertebrate CNS. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:7–18.
- Kapfhammer JP, Grunewald BE, Raper JA. 1986. The selective inhibition of growth cone extension by specific neurites in culture. J Neurosci 6:2527–2534.
- Keino-Masu K, Hinck L, Leonardo ED, Chan SS, Culotti JG, Tessier-Lavigne M. 1996. Deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) encodes a netrin receptor. Cell 87:75–85.
- Kidd T, Brose K, Mitchell KJ, et al. 1998. Roundabout controls axon crossing of the CNS midline and defines a novel subfamily of evolutionarily conserved guidance receptors. Cell 92:205–215.
- Kishi M, Pan YA, Crump JG, Sanes JR. 2005. Mammalian SAD kinases are required for neuronal polarization. Science 307:929–932.
- Lefebvre JL, Kostadinov D, Chen WV, Maniatis T, Sanes JR. 2012. Protocadherins mediate dendritic self-avoidance in the mammalian nervous system. Nature 488:517–521.
- Letourneau PC. 1979. Cell-substratum adhesion of neurite growth cones, and its role in neurite elongation. Exp Cell Res 124:127–138.
- Leung K-M, van Horck FPG, Lin AC, Allison R, Standart N, Holt CE. 2006. Asymmetrical beta-actin mRNA translation in growth cones mediates attractive turning to netrin-1. Nat Neurosci 9:1247–1256.
- Ming GL, Song HJ, Berninger B, Holt CE, Tessier-Lavigne M, Poo MM. 1997. cAMP-dependent growth cone guidance by netrin-1. Neuron 19:1225–1235.
- Polleux F, Morrow T, Ghosh A. 2000. Semaphorin 3A is a chemoattractant for cortical apical dendrites. Nature 404:567–573.
- Serafini T, Colamarino SA, Leonardo ED, et al. 1996. Netrin-1 is required for commissural axon guidance in the developing vertebrate nervous system. Cell 87:1001–1014.
- Shigeoka T, Jung H, Jung J, et al. 2016. Dynamic axonal translation in developing and mature visual circuits. Cell 166:181–192.
- Sperry RW. 1943. Visuomotor coordination in the newt (Triturus viridescens) after regeneration of the optic nerve. J Compar Neurol 79:33–55.
- Sperry RW. 1945. Restoration of vision after crossing of optic nerves and after contralateral transplantation of eye. J Neurophysiol 8:17–28.
- Thu CA, Chen WV, Rubinstein R, et al. 2014. Single-cell identity generated by combinatorial homophilic interactions between α , β, and γ protocadherins. Cell 158:1045–1059.
- Walter J, Henke-Fahle S, Bonhoeffer F. 1987. Avoidance of posterior tectal membranes by temporal retinal axons. Development 101:909–913.
- Wang L, Marquardt T. 2013. What axons tell each other: axon-axon signaling in nerve and circuit assembly. Curr Opin Neurobiol 23:974–982.
- Weiss P. 1941. Nerve patterns: the mechanics of nerve growth. Growth 5:163–203. Suppl.
- Zhang XH, Poo MM. 2002. Localized synaptic potentiation by BDNF requires local protein synthesis in the developing axon. Neuron 36:675–688.
- Jung H, Gkogkas CG, Sonenberg N, Holt CE. 2014. Remote control of gene function by local translation. Cell 157:26–40.
- Lai Wing Sun K, Correia JP, Kennedy TE. 2011. Netrins: versatile extracellular cues with diverse functions. Development 138:2153–2169.
- Lefebvre JL, Sanes JR, Kay JN. 2015. Development of dendritic form and function. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31:741–777.
- Tojima T, Hines JH, Henley JR, Kamiguchi H. 2011. Second messengers and membrane trafficking direct and organize growth cone steering. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:191–203.
- Zhang C, Kolodkin AL, Wong RO, James RE. 2017. Establishing wiring specificity in visual system circuits: from the retina to the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:395–424.
- Zipursky SL, Grueber WB. 2013. The molecular basis of selfavoidance. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:547–568.

## References

- Barnes AP, Lilley BN, Pan YA, et al. 2007. LKB1 and SAD kinases define a pathway required for the polarization of cortical neurons. Cell 129:549–563.
- Bridgman PC, Dailey ME. 1989. The organization of myosin and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones. J Cell Biol 108:95–109.
- Campbell DS, Holt CE. 2001. Chemotropic responses of retinal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthesis and degradation. Neuron 32:1013–1026.
- Fazeli A, Dickinson SL, Hermiston ML, et al. 1997. Phenotype of mice lacking functional Deleted in colorectal cancer (Dcc) gene. Nature 386:796–804.
- Forscher P, Smith SJ. 1988. Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone. J Cell Biol 107:1505–1516.
- Frisen J, Yates PA, McLaughlin T, Friedman GC, O'Leary DD, Barbacid M. 1998. Ephrin-A5 (AL-1/RAGS) is essential for proper retinal axon guidance and topographic mapping in the mammalian visual system. Neuron 20:235–243.
- Godement P, Wang LC, Mason CA. 1994. Retinal axon divergence in the optic chiasm: dynamics of growth cone behavior at the midline. J Neurosci 14:7024–7039.
- Grueber WB, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2003. Different levels of the homeodomain protein cut regulate distinct dendrite branching patterns of Drosophila multidendritic neurons. Cell 112:805–818.
- Harrison RG. 1959. The outgrowth of the nerve fiber as a mode of protoplasmic movement. J Exp Zool 142:5–73.
- Heidemann SR. 1996. Cytoplasmic mechanisms of axonal and dendritic growth in neurons. Int Rev Cytol 165:235–296.
- Kaech S, Banker G. 2006. Culturing hippocampal neurons. Nat Protoc 1:2406–2415.
- Kalil K, Dent EW. 2014. Branch management: mechanisms of axon branching in the developing vertebrate CNS. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:7–18.
- Kapfhammer JP, Grunewald BE, Raper JA. 1986. The selective inhibition of growth cone extension by specific neurites in culture. J Neurosci 6:2527–2534.
- Keino-Masu K, Hinck L, Leonardo ED, Chan SS, Culotti JG, Tessier-Lavigne M. 1996. Deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) encodes a netrin receptor. Cell 87:75–85.
- Kidd T, Brose K, Mitchell KJ, et al. 1998. Roundabout controls axon crossing of the CNS midline and defines a novel subfamily of evolutionarily conserved guidance receptors. Cell 92:205–215.
- Kishi M, Pan YA, Crump JG, Sanes JR. 2005. Mammalian SAD kinases are required for neuronal polarization. Science 307:929–932.
- Lefebvre JL, Kostadinov D, Chen WV, Maniatis T, Sanes JR. 2012. Protocadherins mediate dendritic self-avoidance in the mammalian nervous system. Nature 488:517–521.
- Letourneau PC. 1979. Cell-substratum adhesion of neurite growth cones, and its role in neurite elongation. Exp Cell Res 124:127–138.
- Leung K-M, van Horck FPG, Lin AC, Allison R, Standart N, Holt CE. 2006. Asymmetrical beta-actin mRNA translation in growth cones mediates attractive turning to netrin-1. Nat Neurosci 9:1247–1256.
- Ming GL, Song HJ, Berninger B, Holt CE, Tessier-Lavigne M, Poo MM. 1997. cAMP-dependent growth cone guidance by netrin-1. Neuron 19:1225–1235.
- Polleux F, Morrow T, Ghosh A. 2000. Semaphorin 3A is a chemoattractant for cortical apical dendrites. Nature 404:567–573.
- Serafini T, Colamarino SA, Leonardo ED, et al. 1996. Netrin-1 is required for commissural axon guidance in the developing vertebrate nervous system. Cell 87:1001–1014.
- Shigeoka T, Jung H, Jung J, et al. 2016. Dynamic axonal translation in developing and mature visual circuits. Cell 166:181–192.
- Sperry RW. 1943. Visuomotor coordination in the newt (Triturus viridescens) after regeneration of the optic nerve. J Compar Neurol 79:33–55.
- Sperry RW. 1945. Restoration of vision after crossing of optic nerves and after contralateral transplantation of eye. J Neurophysiol 8:17–28.
- Thu CA, Chen WV, Rubinstein R, et al. 2014. Single-cell identity generated by combinatorial homophilic interactions between α , β, and γ protocadherins. Cell 158:1045–1059.
- Walter J, Henke-Fahle S, Bonhoeffer F. 1987. Avoidance of posterior tectal membranes by temporal retinal axons. Development 101:909–913.
- Wang L, Marquardt T. 2013. What axons tell each other: axon-axon signaling in nerve and circuit assembly. Curr Opin Neurobiol 23:974–982.
- Weiss P. 1941. Nerve patterns: the mechanics of nerve growth. Growth 5:163–203. Suppl.
- Zhang XH, Poo MM. 2002. Localized synaptic potentiation by BDNF requires local protein synthesis in the developing axon. Neuron 36:675–688.


Formation and Elimination of Synapses

Neurons Recognize Specific Synaptic Targets

Recognition Molecules Promote Selective Synapse

Formation in the Visual System

## Sensory Receptors Promote Targeting of Olfactory Neurons

Different Synaptic Inputs Are Directed to Discrete Domains of the Postsynaptic Cell

Neural Activity Sharpens Synaptic Specificity

Principles of Synaptic Differentiation Are Revealed at the Neuromuscular Junction

Differentiation of Motor Nerve Terminals Is Organized

## by Muscle Fibers Differentiation of the Postsynaptic Muscle Membrane Is

Organized by the Motor Nerve The Nerve Regulates Transcription of Acetylcholine

Receptor Genes The Neuromuscular Junction Matures in a Series of Steps

Central Synapses and Neuromuscular Junctions Develop in Similar Ways

Neurotransmitter Receptors Become Localized

## at Central Synapses Synaptic Organizing Molecules Pattern Central

Nerve Terminals Some Synapses Are Eliminated After Birth

Glial Cells Regulate Both Formation and Elimination of Synapses

Highlights

S

o far, we have examined three stages in the

development of the mammalian nervous system:

the formation and patterning of the neural tube,

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1181

the generation and differentiation of neurons and glia,

and the growth and guidance of axons. One additional

step must occur before the brain becomes functional:

the formation of synapses. Only when synapses are formed and functional can the brain go about the business of processing information. Three key processes drive synapse formation. First, axons make choices among many potential postsynaptic partners. By forming synaptic connections

only on particular target cells, neurons assemble functional circuits that can process information. In many cases, synapses are even formed at specific sites on the postsynaptic cell; some types of axons form synapses on dendrites, others on cell bodies, and yet others on axons or nerve terminals. Although cellular and subcellular specificity are evident throughout the brain, the general features of synapse formation can be illustrated with a few well-studied examples. Second, after cell–cell contacts have formed, the portion of the axon that contacts the target cell differentiates into a presynaptic nerve terminal, and the

-

domain of the target cell contacted by the axon differentiates into a specialized postsynaptic apparatus. Precise coordination of pre- and postsynaptic differentiation depends on interactions between the axon and its target cell. Much of what we know about these interactions comes from studies of the neuromuscu lar junction, the synapse between motor neurons and skeletal muscle fibers. The simplicity of this synapse made it a favorable system to probe the structural and electrophysiological principles of chemical synapses (Chapter 12), and this simplicity has also helped in the analysis of developing synapses. We will use the neuromuscular synapse to illustrate key features of

12/12/20 3:28 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

synaptic development and then apply insights from

this peripheral synapse to examine synapses that form

in the brain.

Finally, once formed, synapses mature, often undergoing major rearrangements. One striking aspect of the rearrangement is that as some synapses grow

and strengthen, many others are eliminated. Like neuronal cell death (Chapter 46), synapse elimination at first glance is a puzzling and seemingly wasteful step in neural development. It is increasingly clear, however, that it plays a key role in refining initial patterns of connectivity. We will discuss the main features of synaptic rearrangement at the neuromuscular junction, where it has been studied intensively, as well as at synapses between neurons, where it also is prominent. Synapse formation stands at an interesting crossroads in the sequence of events that assemble the nervous system. The initial steps in this process appear to be

largely "hardwired" by molecular programs. However, as soon as synapses form, the nervous system begins to function, and the activity of neural circuits plays a critical role in subsequent development. Indeed, the information-processing capacity of the nervous system is refined through its use, most dramatically in early postnatal life but also into adulthood. In this sense, the nervous system continues to develop throughout life. We will consider this interplay of molecular programs and neural activity as we describe synapse formation and rearrangement. This discussion will be a useful prelude to Chapter 49, in which we discuss how genes and the environment—nature and nurture—interact to customize nervous systems early in postnatal life. Neurons Recognize Specific Synaptic Targets

Once axons reach their designated target areas, they

## must choose appropriate synaptic partners from the

many potential targets within easy reach. Although

synapse formation is a highly selective process at both cellular and subcellular levels, few of the molecules that confer synaptic specificity have been identified. The specificity of synaptic connections is particularly evident when intertwined axons select subsets of target cells. In these cases, axon guidance and selec-

tive synapse formation can be distinguished. The first report of such specificity came more than 100 years ago when J. N. Langley, studying the autonomic nervous system, proposed the first version of a chemospecificity hypothesis (see Chapter 46). Langley observed that autonomic preganglionic neurons are generated at distinct rostrocaudal levels of the spinal cord. Their axons enter sympathetic ganglia together but form synapses

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1182

with different postsynaptic neurons that innervate

distinct targets. Using behavioral assays as a guide,

Langley inferred that the axons of preganglionic neu-

rons located in the rostral spinal cord form synapses on ganglion neurons that project their axons to relatively rostral targets such as the eye, whereas neurons that derive from more caudal regions of the spinal cord synapse on ganglion neurons that project to caudal targets such as the ear (Figure 48–1A). He then showed that similar patterns were reestablished after the preganglionic axons were severed and allowed to regenerate, leading him to postulate that some sort of molecular recognition was responsible (Figure 48–1B). Electrophysiological studies later confirmed Langley's intuition about the specificity of synaptic connections in these ganglia. Moreover, this selectiv-

ity is apparent from early stages of innervation, even though specific types of postsynaptic neurons are interspersed within the ganglion. The reestablishment of selectivity in adults after nerve damage shows that specificity does not emerge through peculiarities of embryonic timing or neuronal positioning. Recognition Molecules Promote Selective Synapse Formation in the Visual System

## To illustrate the idea of target specificity in more detail, we will first consider retinal ganglion cells. These neurons differ in their response properties—some gan-

glion neurons respond to increases in light level (ON cells), others to decreases (OFF cells), others to moving objects, and still others to light of a particular color. The axons of all ganglion cells run through the optic nerve, forming parallel axonal pathways from the retina to the brain. The response properties of each class of ganglion cell depend on the synaptic inputs they receive from amacrine and bipolar interneurons, which in turn

receive synapses from light-sensitive photoreceptors. All of the synapses from bipolar and amacrine cells onto ganglion cell dendrites occur in a narrow zone of the retina called the inner plexiform layer. Axons and dendrites therefore have the daunting task of recognizing their correct partners within a large crowd of inappropriate bystanders. One important contributor to synaptic matchmaking in the inner plexiform layer is its division into sublayers. The processes of each amacrine and bipolar

cell type, as well as the dendrites of each functionally distinct ganglion cell type, branch and synapse in just one or a few of approximately 10 sublayers. For example, the dendrites of ON and OFF cells are restricted to inner and outer portions of the plexiform layer,

12/12/20 3:28 PM

targets.

Pupil

dilation

A. Preganglionic motor neurons arise from different levels of the thoracic spinal cord. Axons that arise from rostrally located thoracic neurons innervate superior cervical ganglion neurons that

<!-- image -->

project to rostral targets, including the intrinsic eye muscles. Axons that arise from neurons at caudal levels of the thoracic spinal cord innervate ganglion neurons that project to more

respectively, and therefore receive synapses from dif-

ferent interneurons; particular types of ON and OFF

cells have narrower restrictions within these zones

(Figure 48–2). This layer-specific arborization of preand postsynaptic processes restricts the choice of synaptic partners to which they have ready access. Similar lamina-specific connections are found in many other regions of the brain and spinal cord. For example, in the cerebral cortex, distinct populations of axons confine their dendritic arbors and synapses to just one or two of the six main layers. Laminar specificity does not, however, completely account for the wiring of the retina. As the number of retinal cell types—currently estimated at around 130 in

mice—greatly exceeds the number of plexiform sublayers, the processes of many cell types arborize within

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1183

Ear

vasocon-

striction

A

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses

B

Normal

C8

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

Segmental origin Denervated Reinnervated Normal Reinnervated Ear vasoconstriction Pupil dilation

caudal targets, such as the blood vessels of the ear. These two

classes of ganglion neurons are intermingled in the ganglion,

which suggested to J. N. Langley that preganglionic axons from

different thoracic levels selectively form synapses with ganglion neurons that terminate in specific peripheral targets. B. After nerve damage in adults, similar segment-specific patterns of connectivity form during reinnervation, supporting the notion that synapse formation is selective. (Adapted from Njå

and Purves 1977.)

each sublayer. Anatomical and physiological studies

have shown that connectivity is specific even within

individual sublayers. Moreover, patterns of con-

nectivity appear to be largely, although not entirely, "hardwired," occurring before visual experience has a chance to affect circuitry. Thus, there must be molecules that restrict axons and dendrites to specific sublayers, as well as molecules that distinguish synaptic partners within a sublayer. One clue to the basis of both laminar and intrala -minar synaptic specificity in the retina comes from the finding that specific types of interneurons and

ganglion neurons express different classes of recognition molecules of the immunoglobulin and cadherin families (Chapter 47). Thus, the processes of cells that express a particular recognition molecule are confined

12/12/20 3:28 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

synapses. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sanes and Off layer On layer DscamL

DscamL

ganglion cell. The responses of OFF and ON retinal ganglion

cells are shown on the right.

<!-- image -->

Yamagata 2009.)

A. The dendrites of retinal ganglion neurons receive input from the processes of retinal interneurons (amacrine and bipolar cells) in the inner plexiform layer, which is subdivided into at

least 10 sublaminae. Specific subsets of interneurons and ganglion cells often arborize and synapse in just one layer. These lamina-specific connections determine which aspects of visual stimuli (their onset or offset) activate each type of retinal to one or a few plexiform sublayers (Figure 48–2B).

Many of these proteins promote homophilic interac-

tions; that is, they bind to the same protein on other

cell surfaces. The roles of several recognition molecules have now been assessed in chick and mouse retina, either by removing them during development or by implanting them into neurons that do not normally express them. Results of these so-called "loss-offunction" and "gain-of-function" experiments hint at the existence of a complex code of recognition molecules that promotes specific connectivity within a target region. In mice, for example, two cadherins direct bipolar interneurons to appropriate sublayers, while Sidekick 2, a member of the immunoglobulin

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1184

B. Immunoglobulin superfamily adhesion molecules

(Sdk1, Sdk2, Dscam, and DscamL) are expressed by different subsets of amacrine and retinal ganglion neurons in

the developing chick embryo. Amacrine neurons that express one of these four proteins form synapses with retinal ganglion cells that express the same protein. Manipulating Sdk or Dscam expression alters these patterns of lamina-specific arborization. superfamily, is required for interneurons to choose

among ganglion cells with dendrites in one particular

sublayer.

Sensory Receptors Promote Targeting of Olfactory Neurons

## A different type of specificity is evident in the olfactory system. Each olfactory sensory neuron in the nasal

epithelium expresses just one of approximately 1,000

types of odorant receptors. Neurons expressing one receptor are randomly distributed across a large sector of the epithelium, yet all of their axons converge on the dendrites of just a few target neurons in the olfactory

12/12/20 3:28 PM

bulb, forming synapse-rich glomeruli (Figure 48–3A).

When an individual olfactory receptor is deleted, the

axons that normally express the receptor reach the

olfactory bulb but fail to converge into specific glomeruli or to terminate on the appropriate postsynaptic cells (Figure 48–3B). Conversely, when neurons are forced to express a different odorant receptor, their axons form glomeruli at a different position within the olfactory bulb (Figure 48–3C). Together, these experiments suggest that olfactory receptors not only determine a neuron's responsiveness to specific odorants but also help the axon to form

appropriate synapses on target neurons. Initially, it was suspected that specific olfactory receptors served not only as odor detectors but also as recognition molecules. More recent studies provide evidence for a different mechanism: that second messengers generated from activation of the olfactory receptors influence the expression of recognition molecules that match olfactory axons with appropriate targets in the olfactory bulb. The matching occurs in two steps. First, intrinsic differences in the abilities of olfactory receptors to stimulate formation of the second messenger cyclic Glomeruli

<!-- image -->

adenosine monophosphate lead to differential expression of guidance molecules in embryos, generating a coarse matching of olfactory neurons and olfactory bulb targets along the anterior-posterior axis. Second, selective expression of recognition molecules by four groups of olfactory sensory neurons targets them to corresponding domains along the dorsoventral axis of the olfactory bulb. Thus, an early phase of molecular recognition generates a coarse map of nose-to-brain connectivity by activity-independent mechanisms (Figure 48–4A).

Figure 48–3 (Right) Odorant receptors influence the targeting Then, postnatally, odorant receptors are activated by odorants, and because of developmental changes in Receptors

<!-- image -->

of sensory axons to discrete glomeruli in the olfactory bulb.

(Adapted, with permission, from Sanes and Yamagata 2009.)

A. Each olfactory receptor neuron expresses one of approximately 1,000 possible odorant receptors. Neurons expressing the same receptor are distributed sparsely throughout the

olfactory epithelium of the nose. The axons of these neurons form synapses with target neurons in a single glomerulus in the olfactory bulb. B. In mouse mutants in which an odorant receptor gene has been deleted, the sensory neurons that would have expressed the gene send their axons to other glomeruli, in part because

these neurons now express other receptors. C. When one odorant receptor gene replaces another in a set of sensory neurons, their axons project improperly.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1185

<!-- image -->

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses

A Wild type


12/12/20 3:28 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Immature olfactory sensory neurons B Mature olfactory sensory neurons Odorant Adenylyl cyclase III


–

channel


–

High

Cyclic nucleotide-

gated channel

<!-- image -->

cAMP

High

Posterior

Glomeruli

Figure 48–4 Odorant receptors promote specific connec-

tions in the olfactory bulb by controlling expression of

Adenylyl

cyclase III

<!-- image -->

guidance and recognition molecules. Activation of olfactory Kirrel2

receptors in olfactory sensory neurons leads to activation of adenylyl cyclase and production of the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). A. Prenatally, prior to olfaction, the receptors are spontaneously active. Different receptor types exhibit different levels of spontaneous activity and therefore generate different levels of

EphA5

protein; Nrp1, neuropilin1; PKA, protein kinase A.)

B. Postnatally, olfactory receptors are activated by odorant molecules. This olfactory activity also generates distinct levels of cAMP in each type of odorant receptor neuron, but now the second mes-

cAMP, which in turn induce distinct, graded levels of axon guidance molecules such as neuropilins and semaphorins. These guidance molecules mediate interactions among axons that

intracellular signaling, this activation leads to induc-

tion of a second set of recognition molecules. These

molecules lead to convergence of axons onto glomeruli,

thus refining the projection by an activity-dependent mechanism (Figure 48–4B). Segregation of axons first to particular regions and then to particular glomeruli occurs via both adhesive and repulsive interactions.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1186

senger acts through ion channels to induce new sets of guidance molecules such as kirrels and ephrins. These molecules mediate interactions that segregate axonal terminals into glomeruli. Thus, successive phases of receptor activity, the first spontaneous and the second evoked by odorants, act together to map olfactory sensory axons of different types onto different glomeruli.

Different Synaptic Inputs Are Directed to Discrete

Domains of the Postsynaptic Cell

## Nerve terminals not only discriminate among candidate targets but also terminate on a specific portion of

the target neuron. In the cerebral cortex and hippocam-

pus, for example, axons arriving in layered structures

12/12/20 3:28 PM

## Odorant receptor

Odorant Figure 48–5 The axons of inhibitory interneurons in the cerebellum terminate on a distinct region of the cerebellar often confine their terminals to one layer, even if the Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses Receptor Neurofascin Ankyrin G

Purkinje cell. Many neurons form synapses

on cerebellar Purkinje neurons, each selecting a distinct domain on the Purkinje cell. The axons of inhibitory basket cells form most of their synapses on the axon hillock and initial segment. Basket cells select these domains by recognizing neurofascin, a cell surface immunoglobulin superfamily adhesion molecule that is anchored to the initial segment of the axon by ankyrin G. When the localization of neurofascin is perturbed, basket cell axons fail to restrict synapse formation to the initial segment. (Adapted from Huang 2006.)

<!-- image -->

dendritic tree of the postsynaptic cell traverses numer-

ous layers. In the cerebellum, the axons of different

types of neurons terminate on distinct domains of the Purkinje neurons. Granule cell axons contact distal dendritic spines, climbing fiber axons contact proximal dendritic shafts, and basket cell axons contact the axon hillock and initial segment (Figure 48–5). Such specificity presumably relies on molecular cues on the postsynaptic cell surface. For Purkinje neurons of the cerebellum, one such cue is neurofascin, an

adhesion molecule of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Neurofascin is present at high levels on the axonal initial segment, thus directing basket cells to form axons selectively on this axonal domain. Adhesion molecules can therefore also serve as recognition molecules for particular domains of a neuron. Since individual neurons can form synapses with several classes of pre- and postsynaptic cells, it follows that each neuronal subtype must express a variety of synaptic recognition molecules. Neural Activity Sharpens Synaptic Specificity

So far, we have emphasized the role of recognition

## molecules in the initial formation of synapses. Once

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1187

cuit plays a critical role in refining synaptic patterns.

For example, as described above, guidance of olfactory

neurons to the olfactory bulb includes an initial activityindependent crude mapping followed by an activitydependent phase in which the projection is refined. A similar biphasic pattern has been studied in detail in the visual system. Retinal ganglion cells project to the optic tectum (superior colliculus), where

interactions between ephrins and Eph kinases result in formation of a crude retinotopic map of retinal axons on the tectal surface (Chapter 47). Activity-dependent processes then sculpt the axonal arbors of retinal ganglion cells. The axons initially form broad diffuse arbors, which gradually become denser but more focused, sharpening the tectal map (Figure 48–6). This refinement is inhibited when the activity of synapses is blocked. The molecular mechanisms of this activitydependent refinement are largely unknown. As in the olfactory system, an attractive idea is that the level and pattern of neuronal activity regulate the expression of recognition molecules. These examples from the olfactory and visual systems illustrate a widespread phenomenon: Molecular cues initially control synapse specificity, but once

the circuit begins to function, specificity is sharpened

12/12/20 3:28 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

<!-- image -->

ganglion cells initially form dendritic arbors that are limited to

specific sublaminae in the inner plexiform layer of the retina, whereas others initially form diffuse arbors that are later pruned to form large specific patterns. Similarly, the axonal through neural activity. In the visual system, sharpen-

ing involves loss of synapses. We will return to this

process of synapse elimination at the end of this

chapter and consider its consequences for behavior in the next chapter. In a few cases, neural activity promotes specificity in a different way, by turning an inappropriate target into an appropriate one. This mechanism has been

most clearly demonstrated in skeletal muscle, where mammalian muscle fibers can be divided into several categories according to their contractile characteristics (Chapter 31). Muscle fibers of particular types express genes for distinctive isoforms of the main contractile proteins, such as myosins and troponins. Few muscles are composed exclusively of a single type of fiber; most have fibers of all types. Yet the branches of an individual motor axon innervate muscle fibers of

a single type, even in "mixed" muscles in which fibers of different types are intermingled (Figure 48–7A). This pattern implies a remarkable degree of synaptic specificity. However, matching does not always come about through recognition in the motor axon of the appropriate type of muscle fiber. The motor axon can

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1188

Off layer

On layer

sive axonal arbor is then refined so as to concentrate many

branches in a small region. Abolishing electrical activity in retinal ganglion cells decreases the remodeling of dendritic and axonal arbors. also convert the target muscle fiber to an appropriate

type. When a muscle is denervated at birth, before the

properties of its fibers are fixed, a nerve that normally

innervates a slow muscle can be redirected to inner -vate a muscle destined to become fast, and vice versa. Under these conditions, the contractile properties of the muscle are partially transformed in a direction imposed by the firing properties of the motor nerve (Figure 48–7B,C). Different patterns of neural activity in fast and slow motor neurons are responsible for the switch in muscle properties. Most strikingly, direct electrical

stimulation of a muscle with patterns normally evoked by slow or fast nerves leads to changes that are nearly as dramatic as those produced by cross-innervation (Figure 48–7D). Although activity-based conversion of the type observed at the neuromuscular junction is unlikely to be a major contributor to synaptic specificity in the central nervous system, it is likely that central axons modify the properties of their synaptic targets, contributing to the diversification of neuronal subtypes and refining connectivity imposed by recognition molecules.

12/12/20 3:28 PM

A

<!-- image -->

skeletal muscle cells.

A. Muscle fibers have characteristic metabolic, molecular, and electrical properties that identify them as "slow" (tonic) or "fast" (phasic) types. The micrograph on the right shows a

section of muscle tissue with histochemical staining for myosin ATPase. The middle sketch shows a section through the muscle, in which motor neurons (green and brown) form synapses on a single type of muscle fiber. (Photo on right reproduced, with permission, from Arthur P. Hays.) B. Motor neurons that connect with fast and slow muscle fibers (fast and slow motor neurons) exhibit distinct patterns of electrical activity: steady low-frequency (tonic) firing for slow fibers and

intermittent high-frequency bursts (phasic) for fast fibers.

Principles of Synaptic Differentiation Are

Revealed at the Neuromuscular Junction

## The neuromuscular junction comprises three types of cells: a motor neuron, a muscle fiber, and Schwann

cells. All three types are highly differentiated in the

region of the synapse.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1189

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


Slow muscle Fast muscle

are fast or slow. Cross-innervation was achieved by surgically

rerouting fast axons to slow muscle and vice versa. Although the properties of the motor neurons are little changed, the properties of the muscle change profoundly. For example, fast motor neurons induce fast properties in the slow muscle. (Adapted, with permission, from Salmons and Sreter 1976.) D. The effects of innervation by fast and slow nerves on muscle are mediated in part by their distinct patterns of activity. Stimulation of a fast muscle in a slow tonic pattern converts the

muscle into a slow type. Conversely, fast phasic stimulation of a slow muscle can convert it to a faster type.

The process of synapse formation is initiated when

a motor axon, guided by the multiple factors described

in Chapter 47, reaches a developing skeletal muscle

and approaches an immature muscle fiber. Contact is made, and the process of synaptic differentiation gets underway. As the growth cone begins its transformation into a nerve terminal, the portion of the muscle

12/12/20 3:28 PM
A

<!-- image -->

skeletal muscle cells.

A. Muscle fibers have characteristic metabolic, molecular, and electrical properties that identify them as "slow" (tonic) or "fast" (phasic) types. The micrograph on the right shows a

section of muscle tissue with histochemical staining for myosin ATPase. The middle sketch shows a section through the muscle, in which motor neurons (green and brown) form synapses on a single type of muscle fiber. (Photo on right reproduced, with permission, from Arthur P. Hays.) B. Motor neurons that connect with fast and slow muscle fibers (fast and slow motor neurons) exhibit distinct patterns of electrical activity: steady low-frequency (tonic) firing for slow fibers and

intermittent high-frequency bursts (phasic) for fast fibers.

Principles of Synaptic Differentiation Are

Revealed at the Neuromuscular Junction

## The neuromuscular junction comprises three types of cells: a motor neuron, a muscle fiber, and Schwann

cells. All three types are highly differentiated in the

region of the synapse.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1189

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


Slow muscle Fast muscle

are fast or slow. Cross-innervation was achieved by surgically

rerouting fast axons to slow muscle and vice versa. Although the properties of the motor neurons are little changed, the properties of the muscle change profoundly. For example, fast motor neurons induce fast properties in the slow muscle. (Adapted, with permission, from Salmons and Sreter 1976.) D. The effects of innervation by fast and slow nerves on muscle are mediated in part by their distinct patterns of activity. Stimulation of a fast muscle in a slow tonic pattern converts the

muscle into a slow type. Conversely, fast phasic stimulation of a slow muscle can convert it to a faster type.

The process of synapse formation is initiated when

a motor axon, guided by the multiple factors described

in Chapter 47, reaches a developing skeletal muscle

and approaches an immature muscle fiber. Contact is made, and the process of synaptic differentiation gets underway. As the growth cone begins its transformation into a nerve terminal, the portion of the muscle

12/12/20 3:28 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

surface opposite the nerve terminal begins to acquire

its own specializations. As development proceeds,

synaptic components are added and structural signs

of synaptic differentiation become apparent in the preand postsynaptic cells and in the synaptic cleft. Eventually, the neuromuscular junction acquires its mature and complex form (Figure 48–8). Three general features of neuromuscular junction development have provided clues about the molecular mechanisms that underlie synapse formation.

First, nerve and muscle organize each other's differentiation. In principle, the precise apposition of preand postsynaptic specializations might be explained by independent programming of nerve and muscle properties. However, in muscle cells cultured alone, acetylcholine (ACh) receptors are generally distributed uniformly on the surface, although some are clustered as in mature postsynaptic membranes. Yet, when motor neurons are added to the cultures, they extend neurites that contact the muscle cells more or less randomly, instead of seeking out the ACh receptor clusters. New receptor clusters appear precisely at the points of contact with the presynaptic neurites, while preexisting uninnervated clusters eventually disperse (Figure 48–9). Thus, factors on or released by motor axons exert a profound influence on the synaptic organization of the muscle cell. Likewise, muscles signal retrogradely to motor nerve terminals. When motor neurons in culture extend neurites, they assemble and transport synap-

tic vesicles, some of which form aggregates similar to those found in nerve terminals. When the neurites contact muscle cells, new vesicle clusters form opposite the muscle membrane, and most of the preexisting clusters disperse. These studies also revealed a second feature of neuromuscular development: that motor neurons and muscle cells can synthesize and arrange most syn-

aptic components without each other's help. Uninnervated myotubes can synthesize functional ACh receptors and gather them into high-density aggregates. Likewise, motor axons can form synaptic vesicles and cluster them into varicosities in the absence of muscle. In fact, vesicles in growth cones can synthesize and release ACh in response to electrical stimulation, before the growth cone has reached its target cells. Thus, the developmental signals that pass between nerve and muscle do not induce wholesale changes in cell properties; rather, they assure that components of the pre- and postsynaptic machinery are organized at the correct time and in the right places. It is useful therefore to think of the intercellular signals that control synaptogenesis as organizers rather than inducers.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1190

A third key feature of neuromuscular junction

development is that new synaptic components are

added in several distinct steps. The newly formed

synapse is not simply a prototype of a fully developed synapse. Although nerve and muscle membrane form close contacts at early stages of synaptogenesis, only later does the synaptic cleft widen and the basal lamina appear. Similarly, ACh receptors accumulate in the postsynaptic membrane before acetylcholinesterase accumulates in the synaptic cleft, and the postsynaptic membrane acquires junctional folds only after the nerve terminal has matured. Several different axons innervate each myotube around the time of birth, but during early postnatal life, all but one axon withdraws. This elaborate sequence is not orchestrated by the simple act of contact between nerve and muscle. Instead, multiple signals pass between the cells—the

nerve sends a signal to the muscle that triggers the first steps in postsynaptic differentiation, at which point the muscle sends a signal that triggers the initial steps of nerve terminal differentiation. The nerve then sends further signals to the muscle, and this interaction continues. We now consider retrograde (from muscle to nerve) and anterograde (from nerve to muscle) organizers in more detail.

Differentiation of Motor Nerve Terminals Is Organized by Muscle Fibers

## Soon after the growth cone of a motor axon contacts a developing myotube, a rudimentary form of neurotransmission begins. The axon releases ACh in vesic-

ular packets, the transmitter binds to receptors, and the myotube responds with depolarization and weak contraction. The onset of transmission at the new synapse reflects the intrinsic capabilities of each synaptic partner. Nevertheless, these intrinsic capabilities cannot

readily explain the marked increase in the rate of transmitter release that occurs after nerve-muscle contact is made, nor can they explain the accumulation of synaptic vesicles and the assembly of active zones in the small portion of the motor axon that contacts the muscle surface. These developmental steps require signals from muscle to nerve. A clue to the source of these signals came from studies on the reinnervation of adult muscle. Although axotomy leaves muscle fibers denervated and leads to

insertion of ACh receptors in nonsynaptic regions, the postsynaptic apparatus remains largely intact. It is still recognizable by its synaptic nuclei, junctional folds, and the ACh receptors, which remain far more densely

12/12/20 3:28 PM

A Development stages


<!-- image -->

Figure 48–8 The neuromuscular junction develops in

A. A growth cone approaches a newly fused myotube (1)

B Mature neuromuscular junction

<!-- image -->

Nerve

terminal cell

and forms a morphologically unspecialized but functional contact (2). The nerve terminal accumulates synaptic

<!-- image -->

vesicles and a basal lamina forms in the synaptic cleft (3). As the muscle matures, multiple axons converge on a single site (4). Finally, all axons but one are eliminated and the surviving terminal matures (5). As the synapse matures, acetylcholine (ACh) receptors become concentrated in the

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1191

1993.)

B. At the mature neuromuscular junction, pre- and postsynaptic membranes are separated by a synaptic cleft that contains basal lamina and extracellular matrix proteins. Vesicles are

clustered at presynaptic release sites, transmitter receptors are clustered in the postsynaptic membrane, and nerve terminals are coated by Schwann cell processes. (Micrograph reproduced, with permission, from T. Gillingwater.)

12/12/20 3:28 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Myocyte

<!-- image -->

actions. Acetylcholine receptors (AChR) are synthesized by

muscle cells cultured without neurons. Many receptors are diffusely distributed, but some form high-density aggregates similar to those found in the postsynaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junction. When neurons first contact muscle, they do not restrict themselves to the receptor-rich aggregates. Instead, new receptor aggregates form at sites of neuritemuscle contact, and many of the preexisting clusters disperse. Similarly, motor axons contain synaptic vesicles that cluster at sites of neurite contact with muscle cells. (Adapted, with permission, from Anderson and Cohen 1977; Lupa, Gordon, and Hall 1990.) packed in synaptic areas than in extrasynaptic areas of

the cell. Damaged peripheral axons regenerate readily

(unlike those in the central nervous system) and form

new neuromuscular junctions that look and perform much like the original ones. A century ago, Fernando Tello-Muñóz, a student of Santiago Ramón y Cajal, noted that the new junctions

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1192

form at preexisting synaptic sites on the denervated

muscle fibers even though the postsynaptic speciali-

zations occupy only 0.1% of the muscle fiber surface

(Figure 48–10A). Later, electron microscopy showed that specialization in the axon occurs only in the terminals that contact the muscle. For example, active zones form directly opposite the mouths of the postsynaptic junctional folds. This striking example of subcellular specificity implies that motor axons recognize signals associated with the postsynaptic apparatus. When regenerating axons reach a muscle fiber, they encounter the basal lamina of the synaptic cleft. To explore the significance of this association, muscles

were damaged in vivo in a way that killed the muscle fibers but left their basal lamina intact. The necrotic fibers were phagocytized, leaving behind basal lamina sheaths on which synaptic sites were readily recognizable. At the same time that the muscle was damaged, the nerve was cut and allowed to regenerate. Under these conditions, motor axons reinnervated the empty basal lamina sheaths, contacting synaptic sites as precisely as they would have if muscle fibers were present. Moreover, nerve terminals developed at these sites and active zones even formed opposite struts of basal lamina that once lined junctional folds. These observations implied that components of the basal lamina organize presynaptic specialization (Figure 48–10B). Several such molecular organizers have now been identified. Among the best studied are isoforms of the protein laminin. Laminins are major components of all

basal laminae and promote axon outgrowth in many neuronal types. They are heterotrimers of α , β, and γ chains, comprising a family of five α, four β, and three γ chains (Chapter 47). Muscle fibers synthesize multiple laminin isoforms and incorporate them into the basal lamina. Laminin-211, a heterotrimer containing the α2, β1, and γ1 chains, is the major laminin in the basal lamina, and its absence leads to severe muscular dystrophy. In the synaptic cleft, however, isoforms bearing the β2 chain predominate (Figure 48–11A), and nerve terminals fail to differentiate fully in mutant mice that lack the β2 laminin (Figure 48–11B). The β2 laminins appear to act by binding to voltage-sensitive calcium channels that reside in the axon terminal membrane, where they couple activity to transmitter release. Laminins act on the extracellular domain of the chan -nels, whereas the intracellular segment recruits or stabilizes other components of the release apparatus. The finding that presynaptic differentiation is only partially compromised in the absence of laminins indicated that additional muscle-derived organizers

of axonal specialization must exist. Several have now been identified, including members of the fibroblast

12/12/20 3:28 PM

A

terminals.

Motor

nerve

<!-- image -->

Denervation Persistent denervation

and muscle elimination Persistent denervation and muscle elimination Muscle satellite cells Muscle regenerated in absence of nerve

C. Following denervation of a skeletal muscle fiber and

A. Damaged motor axons regenerate and form new neuromuscular junctions. Nearly all of the new synapses form at the original synaptic sites. (Micrograph reproduced, with

<!-- image -->

permission, from Glicksman and Sanes 1983.) B. A strong preference for innervation at original synaptic sites persists even after the muscle fibers have been removed, leaving behind basal lamina "ghosts." Regenerated axons develop

synaptic specialization on contact with the original synaptic

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1193

elimination of mature muscle fibers, muscle satellite cells proliferate and differentiate to form new myofibers. The

expression of acetylcholine (ACh) receptors on the regenerated myofiber surface is concentrated in the synaptic areas of basal lamina, even when reinnervation is prevented. (Micrograph reproduced, with permission, from Burden, Sargent, and McMahan 1979. © The Rockefeller University Press. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)

12/12/20 3:29 PM

Basal

lamina



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Wild type

Nerve

terminal Schwann cell

<!-- image -->

A. Different laminin isoforms are found in synaptic (brown) and

extrasynaptic (green) areas of basal lamina. Isoforms, containing the β2 chain, are concentrated in the synaptic areas.

growth factor and collagen IV families, as well as a

muscle membrane-associated protein, LRP4, that we

will soon encounter again in the context of postsynap-

tic differentiation. Thus target-derived proteins from multiple families collaborate to organize the presynaptic nerve terminal. Differentiation of the Postsynaptic Muscle Membrane Is Organized by the Motor Nerve

## Soon after myoblasts fuse to form myotubes, the genes that encode ACh receptor subunits are activated. Receptor subunits are synthesized, assembled into

pentamers in the endoplasmic reticulum, and inserted into the plasma membrane. As noted above, some receptors spontaneously form aggregates, but the majority are distributed throughout the membrane at a low density, approximately 1,000 per μm 2 . Once synapse formation is complete, however, the distribution of the receptors changes drastically. The receptors become concentrated at the synaptic sites of


the synaptic cleft is invaded by Schwann cell processes (blue).

(Micrograph reproduced, with permission, from Noakes et al. 1995.)

isoforms are also made by muscle cells, but the neu-

ronal isoforms are about a thousand-fold more active

in aggregating ACh receptors.

The phenotype of mutant mice lacking agrin shows that agrin has a central role in the organization of ACh receptors. Agrin mutants have grossly per-

turbed neuromuscular junctions and die at birth. The number, size, and density of ACh receptor aggregates are severely reduced in these mice (Figure 48–12C). Other components of the postsynaptic apparatus— including cytoskeletal, membrane, and basal lamina proteins—are also reduced. Interestingly, the differentiation of presynaptic elements is also perturbed. However, the defects in the presynaptic element do not result directly from lack of agrin in the motor neuron, but rather indirectly from the failure of the disorganized postsynaptic apparatus to generate signals for presynaptic specialization. How does agrin work? Agrin's major receptor is a complex of a muscle-specific tyrosine kinase called MuSK (muscle-specific trk-related receptor with a

the membrane (to a density up to 10,000 per μm depleted in the nonsynaptic membrane (reduced to 10 per μm 2 or less). This thousand-fold difference in ACh receptor density occurs within a few tens of micrometers from the edge of the nerve terminal. Appreciation of the critical role of the nerve in the redistribution of ACh receptors inspired a search for factors that might promote their clustering. This quest

led to the discovery of a proteoglycan, agrin. Agrin is synthesized by motor neurons, transported down the axon, released from nerve terminals, and incorporated into the synaptic cleft (Figure 48–12A,B). Some agrin

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1194

) and kringle domain) and a coreceptor subunit called LRP4 (Figure 48–12A). MuSK and LRP4 are normally concentrated at synaptic sites in the muscle membrane, and muscles of mutant mice lacking MuSK or LRP4 do not have ACh receptor clusters (Figure 48–12C). Myotubes generated in vitro from these mutants express normal levels of ACh receptors, but these receptors cannot be clustered by agrin. Binding of agrin to the MuSK/ LRP4 complex initiates a chain of events that ends in receptor clustering. Key events are agrin-induced activation of MuSK's kinase activity; autophosphorylation of the MuSK intracellular domain; recruitment of

12/12/20 3:29 PM

B Laminin mutant

Schwann cell Schwann cell invasion of synaptic cleft

A

Lrp4

ACh receptors

B

Cultured muscle ber

<!-- image -->

A. Agrin is a large (~400 kDa) extracellular matrix proteoglycan.

C. Muscles from wild-type neonatal mice and from three mutant

Alternative splicing includes a "z" exon that confers the ability to cluster ACh receptors. When released by a nerve terminal,

agrin binds Lrp4 on the muscle membrane, activating the membrane-associated receptor tyrosine kinase MuSK and triggering an intracellular cascade that results in ACh receptor clustering. Key intracellular signaling molecules are Dok7, Crk, and CrkL. These signal to rapsyn, a cytoplasmic ACh receptor– associated protein, which physically interacts with and clusters the ACh receptors. (Adapted, with permission, from DeChiara et al. 1996.) B. Few ACh receptor clusters form on myofibers grown in culture under control conditions, but addition of agrin induces

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1195

types. Muscles were labeled for ACh receptors (green) and motor axons (brown). In wild-type mice, ACh receptor clusters

have formed under each nerve terminal by birth, whereas in agrin mutants, most clusters have dispersed. ACh receptor clusters are also absent in MuSK, Dok7, and rapsyn mutant mice. When the genes for agrin and ChAT (choline acetyltransferase) are mutated, clusters of ACh receptors remain, indicating that agrin works by counteracting receptor dispersion mediated by ACh. All mutant conditions also show axonal abnormalities, reflecting defects in retrograde signaling to the motor axon. (Abbreviation: MuSK, muscle-specific trk-related receptor with a kringle domain.) (Adapted, with permission, from Gautam et al. 1996.)

12/12/20 3:29 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

adaptor proteins Dok-7, Crk, and CrkL; and strength-

ening of an interaction between a cytoplasmic protein

rapsyn and the ACh receptors. Rapsyn may be the final

element in the sequence: It binds directly to the ACh receptors and can induce their aggregation in vitro. In mice lacking rapsyn, muscles form normally and ACh receptors accumulate in normal numbers but fail to aggregate at the synaptic sites on the membrane. Accordingly, muscles of mutant mice lacking Dok7 or rapsyn resemble those lacking MuSK or LRP4: They synthesize ACh receptors but do not have ACh receptor clusters. Thus, an extracellular protein (agrin), transmembrane proteins (MuSK and LRP4), adaptor proteins (Dok-7, Crk, and CrkL), and a cytoskeletal protein

(rapsyn) form a chain that links commands from the motor axon to ACh receptor clustering in the muscle membrane. Nevertheless, postsynaptic differentiation can occur in the absence of agrin signaling. This capacity was apparent in early studies on cultured muscle (see

Figure 48–9) and is also seen in vivo: ACh receptor clusters form initially but then disperse in agrin mutants (Figure 48–12C). Clustering also occurs in muscles that lack innervation entirely. Thus, the signaling pathway that initiates postsynaptic differentiation can be activated without agrin, but agrin is required to maintain clustering of ACh receptors. The role of agrin is perhaps best understood in terms of the requirement that pre- and postsynaptic specializations be perfectly aligned. ACh recep-

tor aggregates persist in uninnervated muscles but disappear in agrin mutant muscles, suggesting that axons sculpt the postsynaptic membrane through the combined action of agrin and a dispersal factor. One major dispersal factor is ACh itself; clustering persists in mutants that lack both agrin and ACh (Figure 48–12C). Thus, agrin may render ACh receptors immune to the declustering effects of ACh. Through a combination of positive and negative factors, the motor neuron ensures that the patches of postsynaptic membrane contacted by axon branches are rich in ACh receptors. The Nerve Regulates Transcription of Acetylcholine Receptor Genes

## Along with redistribution of ACh receptors in the plane of the membrane, the motor nerve orchestrates

the transcriptional program responsible for expres-

sion of ACh receptor genes in muscle. To understand this aspect of transcriptional control, it is important to appreciate the geometry of the muscle.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1196

Individual muscle fibers are often more than a

centimeter long and contain hundreds of nuclei along

their length. Most nuclei are far from the synapse, but

a few are clustered beneath the synaptic membrane, so that their transcribed and translated products do not have far to go to reach the synapse. In newly formed myotubes, most nuclei express genes encoding ACh receptor subunits. In adult muscles, however, only synaptic nuclei express ACh receptor genes; nonsynaptic nuclei do not. Two processes contribute to this transformation. First, as synapses begin to form, expression of the ACh receptor subunit genes is increased in synaptic nuclei (Figure 48–13). Signals acting through MuSK

-

are needed for this specialization. Second, around the time of birth, ACh receptor gene expression shuts down in nonsynaptic nuclei. This change reflects a repressive effect of the nerve, as originally shown by studies of denervated muscle. When muscle fibers are denervated, as happens when the motor nerve is damaged, the density of ACh receptors in the postsynaptic membrane increases markedly, a phenomenon termed denervation supersensitivity. This repressive effect of the nerve is mediated by electrical activation of the muscle. Under normal con ditions, the nerve keeps the muscle electrically active,

and fewer ACh receptors are synthesized in active muscle than in inactive muscle. Indeed, direct stimulation of denervated muscle through implanted electrodes decreases ACh receptor expression, preventing or reversing the effect of denervation (Figure 48–13B). Conversely, when nerve activity is blocked by application of a local anesthetic, the number of ACh receptors throughout the muscle fiber increases, even though the synapse is intact. In essence, then, the nerve uses ACh to repress expression of ACh receptor genes extrasynaptically. Current that passes through the channel of the receptor

leads to an action potential that propagates along the entire muscle fiber. This depolarization opens voltagedependent Ca 2+ channels, leading to an influx of Ca 2+ , which activates a signal transduction cascade that reaches nonsynaptic nuclei and regulates transcription of ACh receptor genes. Thus, the same voltage changes that produce muscle contraction over a period of milliseconds also regulate transcription of ACh receptor genes over a period of days. The increase in transcription of ACh receptor genes in nuclei beneath the synapse, along with the decrease in nuclei distant from synapses, leads to local-

ization of ACh receptor mRNA and thus preferential synthesis and insertion of ACh receptors near synaptic sites. This local synthesis is reminiscent of that seen

12/12/20 3:29 PM

A Embryonic muscle ber

regulation and local protein trafficking.

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses

AChR

A. ACh receptors (AChR) are distributed diffusely on the surface of embryonic myotubes. B. After the muscle is innervated by a motor axon, the num-

<!-- image -->

ber of receptors in extrasynaptic regions decreases, whereas receptor density at the synapse increases. This reflects the

aggregation of preexisting receptors and enhanced expression of ACh receptor genes in nuclei that lie directly beneath the

at postsynaptic sites on dendritic spines in the brain.

Local synthesis in muscle is advantageous since ACh

receptors synthesized near the ends of fibers would

never reach the synapse without degradation. Many components of the postsynaptic apparatus are regulated in ways similar to those we have described for ACh receptors—their aggregation

depends on agrin and MuSK, and their transcription is enhanced in synaptic nuclei and repressed in extrasynaptic nuclei by electrical activity. Thus, synaptic components have tailor-made regulatory mechanisms, but many of these components are regulated in parallel.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1197

AChR

ity in muscle represses ACh gene expression in nonsynaptic

nuclei, leading to a lower density of ACh receptors in these regions. The nuclei at synaptic sites are immune to this repressive effect. Following denervation, ACh receptor gene expression is upregulated in extrasynaptic nuclei, although not to the high level attained by synaptic nuclei. Paralysis mimics the effect of denervation, whereas electrical stimulation of denerrvated muscle mimics the influence of the nerve and decreases the density of ACh receptors in the extrasynaptic membrane. The Neuromuscular Junction Matures in

a Series of Steps

## The adult neuromuscular junction is dramatically different in its molecular architecture, shape, size, and

functional properties from the simple nerve-muscle

contact that initiates neurotransmission in the embryo. Maturation of the nerve terminal, the postsynaptic membrane, and the intervening synaptic cleft occurs in a complex series of steps. We illustrate this stepwise synaptic construction with a continued focus on the development of ACh receptors.

12/12/20 3:29 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

As we have seen, ACh receptors aggregate in the

plane of the membrane as the neuromuscular junc-

tion begins to form, and receptor gene transcription

is enhanced in postsynaptic nuclei. A few days later, activity begins to decrease the level of extrasynaptic receptors. These transcriptional changes are soon followed by changes in the stability of the receptors. In embryonic muscle, ACh receptors are turned over rapidly (with a half-life of approximately 1 day) in both synaptic and extrasynaptic regions. In contrast, in adult muscle, the receptors are relatively stable (with a half-life of approximately 2 weeks). The metabolic stabilization of ACh receptors helps concentrate them at synaptic sites and stabilize the postsynaptic apparatus. Yet another alteration is in the composition of the ACh receptors. In the embryo, ACh receptors are composed of α-, β-, δ-, and γ-subunits. During the first few

postnatal days, the γ gene is turned off and a closely related gene called ε is activated. As a result, new ACh receptors inserted in the membrane are composed of α-, β-, δ-, and ε-subunits. This altered subunit composition tunes the receptor in a way that is suited to its mature function. However, although it occurs at the same time as the metabolic stabilization, the two changes are not causally linked. These molecular changes in the ACh receptors are accompanied by changes in their distribution (Figure 48–14). Soon after birth, junctional folds begin to form

in the postsynaptic membrane and ACh receptors become concentrated at the crests of the folds, along with rapsyn, whereas other membrane and cytoskeletal proteins are localized in the depths of the folds. The initial aggregate of ACh receptors appears to have a plaque-like appearance. Perforations that undergo fusion and fission eventually transform the dense plaque into a pretzel shape that follows the branches of the nerve ending. New receptor-associated cytoskeletal proteins are added to the aggregate, presumably to drive the geometric changes. Finally, the postsynaptic membrane enlarges and eventually contains many more ACh receptors than were present in the initial cluster. Each of these changes occurs while the synapse is functional, suggesting that ongoing activity plays an important role in synaptic maturation. Central Synapses and Neuromuscular Junctions

Develop in Similar Ways

## Synapses in the central nervous system are structurally and functionally similar to neuromuscular junc-

tions in many ways. Presynaptically, most of the major

protein components of synaptic vesicles are identical

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1198

at both types of synapses. Likewise, the mechanisms

of transmitter release differ only quantitatively, not

qualitatively. Postsynaptically, neurotransmitter recep-

tors are concentrated beneath the nerve terminal and associated with "clustering" proteins. These parallels extend to synaptic development. Studies of cultured neurons have shown that the cel -lular logic of synapse formation is conserved between

neuromuscular junctions and central synapses. At both synaptic types, pre- and postsynaptic elements regulate each other's differentiation by organizing synaptic components rather than by inducing their expression, and synapses develop in a progressive series of steps (Figure 48–15). The molecular details differ, however. Neuromuscular organizing molecules such as agrin and laminins do not play key roles at central synapses, suggesting that other synaptic organizers are involved. Recently, some of these organizing molecules have been identified. Neurotransmitter Receptors Become Localized at Central Synapses

## The concentration of neurotransmitter receptors in the postsynaptic membrane is a feature shared by many synapses. In the brain, receptors for glutamate, gly-

cine, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and other neurotransmitters are concentrated in patches of membrane aligned with nerve terminals that contain the corresponding transmitter. The processes by which these receptors become localized may be similar to those at the neuromuscular junction. In cultures of dissociated hippocampal neurons, for

example, both glutamatergic and GABAergic nerve terminals appear to stimulate clustering of appropriate receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. Moreover, nerves can induce expression of genes encoding glutamate receptors in central neurons, much as occurs for ACh receptors in muscle. Finally, electrical activity also regulates expression of neurotransmitter receptors in neurons. In forming receptor clusters, central neurons face an obvious challenge that myotubes do not: They are contacted by axon terminals from distinct classes of

neurons that use different neurotransmitters (Figure 48–16A). Thus, the nerve terminal probably has an instructive role in the clustering of receptors. In cultures of hippocampal neurons, glutamatergic and GABAergic axons terminate on adjacent regions of the same dendrite. Initially, glutamate and GABA receptors are dispersed, but soon, each type becomes selectively clustered beneath terminals that release that neurotransmitter. This observation implies the existence of multiple clustering signals with parallel pathways of signal transduction.

12/12/20 3:29 PM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

As we have seen, ACh receptors aggregate in the

plane of the membrane as the neuromuscular junc-

tion begins to form, and receptor gene transcription

is enhanced in postsynaptic nuclei. A few days later, activity begins to decrease the level of extrasynaptic receptors. These transcriptional changes are soon followed by changes in the stability of the receptors. In embryonic muscle, ACh receptors are turned over rapidly (with a half-life of approximately 1 day) in both synaptic and extrasynaptic regions. In contrast, in adult muscle, the receptors are relatively stable (with a half-life of approximately 2 weeks). The metabolic stabilization of ACh receptors helps concentrate them at synaptic sites and stabilize the postsynaptic apparatus. Yet another alteration is in the composition of the ACh receptors. In the embryo, ACh receptors are composed of α-, β-, δ-, and γ-subunits. During the first few

postnatal days, the γ gene is turned off and a closely related gene called ε is activated. As a result, new ACh receptors inserted in the membrane are composed of α-, β-, δ-, and ε-subunits. This altered subunit composition tunes the receptor in a way that is suited to its mature function. However, although it occurs at the same time as the metabolic stabilization, the two changes are not causally linked. These molecular changes in the ACh receptors are accompanied by changes in their distribution (Figure 48–14). Soon after birth, junctional folds begin to form

in the postsynaptic membrane and ACh receptors become concentrated at the crests of the folds, along with rapsyn, whereas other membrane and cytoskeletal proteins are localized in the depths of the folds. The initial aggregate of ACh receptors appears to have a plaque-like appearance. Perforations that undergo fusion and fission eventually transform the dense plaque into a pretzel shape that follows the branches of the nerve ending. New receptor-associated cytoskeletal proteins are added to the aggregate, presumably to drive the geometric changes. Finally, the postsynaptic membrane enlarges and eventually contains many more ACh receptors than were present in the initial cluster. Each of these changes occurs while the synapse is functional, suggesting that ongoing activity plays an important role in synaptic maturation. Central Synapses and Neuromuscular Junctions

Develop in Similar Ways

## Synapses in the central nervous system are structurally and functionally similar to neuromuscular junc-

tions in many ways. Presynaptically, most of the major

protein components of synaptic vesicles are identical

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1198

at both types of synapses. Likewise, the mechanisms

of transmitter release differ only quantitatively, not

qualitatively. Postsynaptically, neurotransmitter recep-

tors are concentrated beneath the nerve terminal and associated with "clustering" proteins. These parallels extend to synaptic development. Studies of cultured neurons have shown that the cel -lular logic of synapse formation is conserved between

neuromuscular junctions and central synapses. At both synaptic types, pre- and postsynaptic elements regulate each other's differentiation by organizing synaptic components rather than by inducing their expression, and synapses develop in a progressive series of steps (Figure 48–15). The molecular details differ, however. Neuromuscular organizing molecules such as agrin and laminins do not play key roles at central synapses, suggesting that other synaptic organizers are involved. Recently, some of these organizing molecules have been identified. Neurotransmitter Receptors Become Localized at Central Synapses

## The concentration of neurotransmitter receptors in the postsynaptic membrane is a feature shared by many synapses. In the brain, receptors for glutamate, gly-

cine, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and other neurotransmitters are concentrated in patches of membrane aligned with nerve terminals that contain the corresponding transmitter. The processes by which these receptors become localized may be similar to those at the neuromuscular junction. In cultures of dissociated hippocampal neurons, for

example, both glutamatergic and GABAergic nerve terminals appear to stimulate clustering of appropriate receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. Moreover, nerves can induce expression of genes encoding glutamate receptors in central neurons, much as occurs for ACh receptors in muscle. Finally, electrical activity also regulates expression of neurotransmitter receptors in neurons. In forming receptor clusters, central neurons face an obvious challenge that myotubes do not: They are contacted by axon terminals from distinct classes of

neurons that use different neurotransmitters (Figure 48–16A). Thus, the nerve terminal probably has an instructive role in the clustering of receptors. In cultures of hippocampal neurons, glutamatergic and GABAergic axons terminate on adjacent regions of the same dendrite. Initially, glutamate and GABA receptors are dispersed, but soon, each type becomes selectively clustered beneath terminals that release that neurotransmitter. This observation implies the existence of multiple clustering signals with parallel pathways of signal transduction.

12/12/20 3:29 PM

Early embryo Newborn Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses

30 days old

<!-- image -->

genesis, ACh receptors exist as loose aggregates. Later, these

aggregates condense into a plaque-like structure. After birth, the dense cluster opens up as the nerve develops multiple

At the neuromuscular junction, rapsyn binds to

the intracellular domain of ACh receptors and clus-

ters them. Several proteins have been found to play

similar roles at central synapses. One, gephyrin, is highly concentrated in the synaptic densities at glycinergic and some GABAergic synapses (Figure 48–16A). Gephyrin is not structurally related to rapsyn but has the same function: It links the receptors to the underlying cytoskeleton. In nonneural cells, glycine receptors cluster when gephyrin is co-expressed; conversely, clusters fail to form at inhibitory synapses in gephyrin-deficient mutant mice (Figure 48–16B). Similarly, a class of proteins that share conserved segments

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1199

which then invaginates to form folds. Receptors are concen-

trated at the crests of the folds. (Adapted, with permission, from Sanes and Lichtman 2001.)

called PDZ domains—the prototypes being PSD-95 or

SAP-90—facilitate clustering of N-methyl-d-aspartate

(NMDA)-type glutamate receptors and their associated

proteins. Other PDZ-containing proteins interact with α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate acid (AMPA), kainate, and metabotropic types of glutamate receptors. Synaptic Organizing Molecules Pattern Central Nerve Terminals

## Although central synapses and neuromuscular junctions share many features, their synaptic clefts differ

12/12/20 3:29 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Development stages

t = 0

<!-- image -->

Figure 48–15 Ultrastructure of a synapse in the mammalian

central nervous system.

A. Initial contact between an axon and a filopodium on

a developing dendrite leads to a stable dendritic spine and an axodendritic synapse. This entire process can

take as little as 60 minutes. (Abbreviations: AMPA

,

dramatically. Whereas muscle fibers are ensheathed by

a basal lamina that has a distinctive molecular struc

-

ture at the neuromuscular junction, central neurons

do not have a prominent basal lamina. Instead, formation of central synapses is regulated in large part by molecules embedded in the pre- and postsynaptic membranes. Several interacting pairs of membrane proteins have now been found that link the pre- and postsynaptic

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1200

Active

zone

α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate acid; NMDA

N-methyl-d-aspartate.)

B. In a mature interneuron synapse in the cerebellum, synaptic

vesicles in the nerve terminal are clustered at active zones (arrows) directly opposite receptor-rich patches of postsynaptic

membrane. (Reproduced, with permission, from J.E. Heuser and T.S. Reese.) membranes and also organize synaptic differentiation

as synapses form. Perhaps the best studied are a set of

proteins called neurexins, which are enriched in presyn-

aptic membranes, and their partners, the neuroligins, which are concentrated in postsynaptic membranes (Figure 48–17A). There are three neurexin and four neuroligin genes in the mammalian genome. The ability of neurexins and neuroligins to promote synaptic differentiation was first revealed by culturing neurons

12/12/20 3:29 PM

B Mature central synapse

,

A

Inhibitory synapse (GABA/glycine)

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses

Excitatory synapse (glutamate)

Metabotropic

Glutamate

receptors

<!-- image -->

Glutamate

receptors

(AMPA)-type and metabotropic glutamate receptors (see

<!-- image -->

A. Glutamate receptors are localized at excitatory synapses,

and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine receptors are localized at inhibitory synapses. The receptors are linked to the

cytoskeleton by adaptor proteins. Glycine receptors are linked to microtubules by gephyrin (left), and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors are linked to each other and to the cytoskeleton by PSD-95–related molecules (right). The PSD family of molecules contains PDZ domains that interact with a variety of synaptic proteins to assemble signaling complexes. Other PDZ-containing proteins interact with

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1201

Chapter 13). (Abbreviations: GAD, glutamate decarboxylase;

GKAP, Guanylate-kinase-associated protein; TARP, transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins; VGlut, vesicular glutamate transporter.) B. In gephyrin mutant mice, glycine receptors do not cluster at synaptic sites on spinal motor neurons, and the animals show spasticity and hyperreflexia. In the same neurons, glutamate

receptor clusters are unaffected. (Adapted, with permission, from Feng et al. 1998.)

12/12/20 3:29 PM


A

No presynaptic organization Neuroligins promote presynaptic organization

<!-- image -->

A. When brain neurons are cultured with fibroblast cells that

express neuroligin, those segments of the axon that contact these cells form presynaptic specializations, marked by clustered neurexin, Ca 2+ channels, and synaptic vesicles.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1202

Neuroligin

patches

Neurexin

patches

B. Similarly, when neurons are cultured with cells that express

neurexin, dendrites that contact these cells accumulate aggre-

gates of glutamate receptors, accompanied by scaffolding

molecules (not shown) and clustered neuroligins. Neurons grown with control cells fail to form such pre- and postsynaptic specializations.

12/12/20 3:29 PM

with nonneural cells engineered to express one or the

other. In culture, synaptic vesicles form clusters at sites

of contact with the neuroligin-expressing cells, and

they are capable of releasing neurotransmitter when stimulated (Figure 48–17A). Conversely, neurotransmitter receptors in dendrites aggregate at sites that contact nonneural cells engineered to express neurexins (Figure 48–17B). Thus, neurexin–neuroligin interactions facilitate precise apposition of pre- and postsynaptic specializations. How do neurexins and neuroligins work? Part of the answer is that their carboxy terminal tails bind to PDZ domains in proteins such as PSD-95 (Figure

48–16). Indeed, a remarkable number of proteins in both pre- and postsynaptic membranes have PDZ domain-binding motifs, notably adhesion molecules, neurotransmitter receptors, and ion channels. Moreover, many cytoplasmic proteins that possess PDZ domains are present in nerve terminals and beneath the postsynaptic membrane. Thus, PDZ-containing proteins can serve as scaffolding molecules that link key components on both sides of the synapse. Interactions of proteins such as neurexins and neuroligins may provide a means of coupling the intercellular interactions required for synaptic recognition to the intracellular interactions required to cluster synaptic components within the cell membrane. Although neurexin–neuroligin interactions promote synaptic differentiation in culture, mice lacking

Netrin G-1

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


neurexins or neuroligins form synapses in vivo. How-

ever, the synapses that form in the mutants are defec-

tive, with the nature and severity of the defects varying

among synaptic types. Thus, the primary role of these synaptic organizers may be to specify the properties of particular synapses. For example, neuroligin1 is concentrated in the postsynaptic membrane of excitatory synapses, and levels of glutamate receptors are reduced at excitatory synapses in neuroligin1 mutants. Conversely, neuroligin2 is concentrated at inhibitory synapses and plays a critical role in patterning the inhibitory postsynaptic membrane. Additional complexity in the tuning of central synapses by neurexins arises from the fact that they bind to multiple postsynaptic organizing molecules in addi-

tion to the neuroligins (Figure 48–18). Moreover, thousands of neurexin isoforms are generated from each neurexin gene as a result of differences in promoter choice (generating α and β forms) and alternative splicing at multiple sites. Different neurexin isoforms are differentially expressed by neurons and have different affinities for the various neurexin ligands. Neuroligins are also alternatively spliced and differentially expressed and thus are likely to have multiple presynaptic partners. More recently, other synaptic organizing molecules have been found; they include protein tyrosine phosphatases and leucine-rich repeat proteins as well

as members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and

SynCam FGFR2b

Neurexin PTP-∂

<!-- image -->

figure shows some of the many transsynaptic proteins that

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1203

properties of the synapse; some may do both.

Frizzled

Wnt7

12/12/20 3:29 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Wnt families of secreted morphogens and their recep-

tors (Figure 48–18). They are present at specific subsets

of synapses and play distinct roles. For example, simi-

lar to neuroligin1 and neuroligin2, FGF22 and FGF7 are localized to and promote differentiation of excitatory and inhibitory synapses, respectively. Some of these organizing proteins may act in parallel with neurexins, while others may act as initial organizers, with neuroligins and neurexins consolidating the synapses at a later time and specifying their particular properties. Together, these results suggest that central synapses are not patterned by master organizers akin to agrin, MuSK, LRP4, and laminins. Indeed, loss of no

single central organizer studied to date is lethal in the manner observed for agrin, MuSK, LRP4, and laminin mutants. Instead, the enormous variety of neuronal and synaptic types in the central nervous system and their wide range of functional properties arise from a multitude of organizers that act combinatorially and in cell type–specific ways. Consistent with this view, genetic variation in many central organizers and synaptic recognition molecules, including neurexins, neuroligins, cadherins, and contactins, has been associated with behavioral perturbations in experimental animals and with behavioral disorders, including autism, in humans (Chapter 62). Some Synapses Are Eliminated After Birth

In adult mammals, each muscle fiber bears only a

## single synapse. However, this is not the case in the

embryo. At intermediate stages of development, sev-

eral axons converge on each myotube and form synapses at a common site. Soon after birth, all inputs but one are eliminated. The process of synapse elimination is not a manifestation of neuronal death. Indeed, it generally occurs long after the period of naturally occurring cell death

(Chapter 46). Each motor axon withdraws branches from some muscle fibers but strengthens its connections with others, thus focusing its increasing capacity for transmitter release on a decreasing number of targets. Moreover, axonal elimination is not targeted to defective synapses; all inputs to a neonatal myotube are morphologically and electrically similar, and each can activate the postsynaptic cell (Figure 48–19). What is the purpose of the transient stage of polyneuronal innervation? One possibility is that it ensures that each muscle fiber is innervated. A second is that it

allows all axons to capture an appropriate set of target cells. A third, intriguing idea is that synapse elimination provides a means by which activity can change

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1204

Polyneuronal

innervation of

immature muscle

axon innervates a

single muscle ber

Figure 48–19 Some neuromuscular synapses are elimi-

nated after birth. Early in the development of the neuromus-

cular junction, each muscle fiber is innervated by several motor

axons. After birth, all motor axons but one withdraw from each fiber, and the surviving axon becomes more elaborate. Synapse elimination occurs without any overall loss of axons—axons that "lose" at some muscle fibers "win" at others. Central synapses are also subject to elimination.

<!-- image -->

the strength of specific synaptic connections. We will

explore this idea in Chapter 49.

Like synapse formation, synapse elimination

results from intercellular interactions. Every muscle fiber ends up with exactly one input: None have

zero, and very few have more than one. It is difficult to imagine how this could occur without feedback from the muscle cell. Moreover, the axons that remain after partial denervation at birth have a larger number of synapses than they did initially. Thus, synapse elimination appears to be a competitive process. What drives the competition, and what is the reward? There is good evidence that neural activity plays a role: Paralysis of muscle reduces synapse elimi-

nation, whereas direct stimulation enhances it. These findings showed that activity was involved but did not reveal how the outcome was determined, because all axons were stimulated or paralyzed together. Because the essence of the competitive process is that some synapses gain territory at the expense of others, differential activity among axons may be a determinant

12/12/20 3:29 PM

of axon winners and losers. Changing the activity of

only a subset of axons in a living animal has been a

technical challenge, but genetic approaches have made

this possible in mice. In fact, when the activity of one of the inputs to a muscle fiber is decreased, that axon is highly likely to withdraw. If the more active axon wins the competition, there is a new problem. Because all synapses made by an axon have the same activity pattern, one might predict Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


fiber that strengthens its adhesive interactions with the

synaptic cleft, whereas the less active axon might elicit

a signal that weakens those interactions.

The complexity of the brain makes direct demonstration of synapse elimination problematic, but electrophysiological evidence from many parts of

-the central nervous system indicates that synapse elimination is widespread. In autonomic ganglia and cerebellar Purkinje cells, synapse elimination has been documented directly and its rules seem similar to those found at neuromuscular junctions. Individual axons withdraw from some postsynaptic cells while simultaneously increasing the size of the synapses they form with other neurons. Glial Cells Regulate Both Formation and

Elimination of Synapses

## Classical studies of synapse formation and maturation focused, logically enough, on the pre- and postsynap-

tic partners. More recently, however, there has been a

growing appreciation of the role played by a third type of cell: the glial cells that cap nerve terminals. Schwann cells are the glia at neuromuscular junctions, and astrocytes are the glia at central synapses. Both have been implicated in synapse formation and maturation. The most penetrating analyses were performed by the late Ben Barres and his colleagues. They devised methods to culture neurons in defined media and in the

complete absence of nonneuronal cells. Using this system, they found that neurons formed few synapses when cultured in isolation but many when astrocytes were present (Figure 48–20). The astrocytes provide multiple signals to neurons. Some, such as thrombospondin, promote postsynaptic maturation, whereas others, such as cholesterol, promote presynaptic maturation. Another glial type, the microglial cell, also plays critical roles. Microglia are relatives of macrophages and monocytes in other tissues, sharing their ability to

eliminate dead cells or debris. Initially thought to be primarily involved in the brain's response to damage, they have now been found to phagocytose synaptic terminals during the period of synapse elimination. True to their phagocytic origins, they use the complex system of complement factors, initially studied in the context of immunity, to target terminals; the targeting is activity dependent, providing a possible mechanism for the activity dependence of synapse elimination (Figure 48–21). An intriguing possibility is that dysregulation of microglial pruning contributes to synaptic loss in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer disease and schizophrenia (see Chapters 60 and 64).

12/12/20 3:29 PM

that the least active axon in the muscle would eventu ally lose all of its synapses and the most active would retain all of its synapses. Yet this does not happen. Instead, all axons win at some sites and lose at others, so that every axon ends up innervating a substantial number of muscle fibers. One possible resolution to this paradox is that the outcome of competition may not depend on the number of synaptic potentials from the winning axon at

a synapse but rather on the total amount of synaptic input that the axon provides to the muscle—a product of the number of impulses and the amount of transmitter released per impulse. In this case, an axon that loses at several synapses might redistribute its resources (eg, synaptic vesicles) so that the remaining terminals would be strengthened and more likely to win at their synapses. Conversely, an axon that wins many competitions might find itself with insufficient vesicles to generate large synaptic potentials and thus would eventually lose to competitors at some synapses. Accordingly, the number of muscle fibers innervated by individual axons would vary much more among axons than is actually observed. If activity drives the competition, what is the object of the competition? One idea is that the mechanisms are similar to those that determine whether neurons live or

die. The muscle might produce limited amounts of a trophic substance for which the axons compete. As the winner grows, it either deprives the loser of its sustenance or gains enough strength to mount an attack that results in removal of its competitor. Alternatively, the muscle might release a toxic or punitive factor. In these scenarios, although the muscle does contribute a factor in the competition, the outcome is entirely dependent on differences between axons. These differences could be related to activity. The more active axon might be better able to take up trophic factor or resist a toxin. Such positive and negative competitive interactions have been demonstrated at nerve-muscle synapses in culture, although not in vivo. Nevertheless, the muscle could play a selective role in synapse elimination rather than just providing a broadly distributed signal. For example, the more

active axon might trigger a signal from the muscle

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1205


Figure 48–20 Signals from astrocytes promote syn-

apse formation.

A. Astrocytes promote the maturation of both pre- and

postsynaptic elements of the synapse. B. Neurons cultured with astrocytes form more synapses,

as assessed by expression of synaptic proteins (yellow dots). (Reproduced, with permission, from Ben A. Barres.)

- C. Retinal neurons cultured with astrocytes form a greater number of synapses, as shown by increased transmitter release.
- D. Synapse formation is enhanced in the presence of astrocytes by three measures.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1206

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

<!-- image -->

Control With astrocytes Astrocytes

Synaptic vesicle
Quantal content
recycling
Immunocyto-chemistry

12/12/20 3:29 PM

Astrocyte

process

<!-- image -->

The engulfment is stimulated by complement components

such as C1q, which tags the inactive terminal and marks it for removal by a process involving interaction of C3 with the The roles of glia in synaptic development are only

beginning to be worked out, and the assignments of

astrocytes and microglia to synapse formation and

elimination are clearly oversimplifications. Both glial types are involved in both processes, and Schwann cells may play both roles at the neuromuscular junction. Moreover, a complex set of signals passes between astrocytes and microglia, and between neurons and glia, all of which contribute to development and are at risk of going awry in brain disorders. Highlights

1. Elaborate guidance mechanisms bring axons to

appropriate target areas, but within those areas

they still need to choose synaptic partners, often

- from among many neuronal types. Multiple mechanisms guide these choices. 2. Matching cell-surface recognition molecules on preand postsynaptic partners provide one prevalent

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1207

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


complement receptor C3R on the microglia. Astrocytes play a

role by secreting transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), which

promotes production of C1q. (Adapted, with permission, from

Allen 2014. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) mechanism for synaptic specificity. They include

members of the cadherin, immunoglobulin, and

leucine-rich repeat protein superfamilies. Individ-

ual members are selectively expressed by subsets of neurons and exhibit selective binding. Often, the binding is homophilic, biasing connectivity in favor of partners expressing the same molecule. 3. Other mechanisms promoting specificity include selective interactions among axons, the ability of some axons to convert their targets to the appro-

- priate types, and selective elimination of inappropriate contacts. 4. At present, it remains unknown how many molecular species are required to wire up neural circuits in the mammalian brain. At one time, it
- seemed that molecular complexity might need to approach the complexity of circuits, but it is more likely that a few hundred recognition molecules will suffice, given their combinatorial use, as well as deployment of the same gene at multiple times and in multiple regions.

12/12/20 3:29 PM
Astrocyte

process

<!-- image -->

The engulfment is stimulated by complement components

such as C1q, which tags the inactive terminal and marks it for removal by a process involving interaction of C3 with the The roles of glia in synaptic development are only

beginning to be worked out, and the assignments of

astrocytes and microglia to synapse formation and

elimination are clearly oversimplifications. Both glial types are involved in both processes, and Schwann cells may play both roles at the neuromuscular junction. Moreover, a complex set of signals passes between astrocytes and microglia, and between neurons and glia, all of which contribute to development and are at risk of going awry in brain disorders. Highlights

1. Elaborate guidance mechanisms bring axons to

appropriate target areas, but within those areas

they still need to choose synaptic partners, often

- from among many neuronal types. Multiple mechanisms guide these choices. 2. Matching cell-surface recognition molecules on preand postsynaptic partners provide one prevalent

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1207

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


complement receptor C3R on the microglia. Astrocytes play a

role by secreting transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), which

promotes production of C1q. (Adapted, with permission, from

Allen 2014. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) mechanism for synaptic specificity. They include

members of the cadherin, immunoglobulin, and

leucine-rich repeat protein superfamilies. Individ-

ual members are selectively expressed by subsets of neurons and exhibit selective binding. Often, the binding is homophilic, biasing connectivity in favor of partners expressing the same molecule. 3. Other mechanisms promoting specificity include selective interactions among axons, the ability of some axons to convert their targets to the appro-

- priate types, and selective elimination of inappropriate contacts. 4. At present, it remains unknown how many molecular species are required to wire up neural circuits in the mammalian brain. At one time, it
- seemed that molecular complexity might need to approach the complexity of circuits, but it is more likely that a few hundred recognition molecules will suffice, given their combinatorial use, as well as deployment of the same gene at multiple times and in multiple regions.

12/12/20 3:29 PM


5.

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Spatial constraints that enhance specificity

include restriction of axons and dendrites to par-

ticular laminae within a target region—thereby

- restricting their choice of partners—and restriction of synapses of particular types to defined domains on the target cell surface. 6. Some specificity mechanisms do not require the partners to be electrically active, but in many cases, activity-dependent mechanisms sharpen
- specificity. Activity can be spontaneous, early in development, or driven by experience at later stages. 7. The skeletal neuromuscular junction, at which the axon of a motor neuron synapses on a muscle fiber, has been a favored preparation for working
- out principles of synaptic development. A key finding is that multiple interactions between the synaptic partners are required for the formation, maturation, and maintenance of the synapse. 8. Motor neurons and muscle fibers can express genes encoding pre- and postsynaptic components, respectively, in each other's absence, but
- they exert profound influences on the levels and distribution of these components in their partners. Thus, signals between synaptic partners are best viewed as organizers rather than inducers. 9. At the neuromuscular junction, a layer of basal lamina occupies the synaptic cleft between the motor nerve terminal and the postsynaptic mem-
- brane. Nerve and muscle secrete signaling molecules into the cleft, where they become stabilized and organize differentiation. 10. A key nerve-derived organizer of postsynaptic differentiation is agrin. It acts through the receptors MuSK and LRP4 to cluster acetylcholine

Selected Reading

Allen NJ, Lyons DA. 2018. Glia as architects of central nerv-

ous system formation and function. Science 362:181–185.

Baier H. 2013. Synaptic laminae in the visual system: molecu-

- lar mechanisms forming layers of perception. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 29:385–416.
- Darabid H, Perez-Gonzalez AP, Robitaille R. 2014. Neuromuscular synaptogenesis: coordinating partners with multiple functions. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:703–718.
- Hirano S, Takeichi M. 2012. Cadherins in brain morphogenesis and wiring. Physiol Rev 92:597–634. Krueger-Burg D, Papadopoulos T, Brose N. 2017. Organizers
- of inhibitory synapses come of age. Curr Opin Neurobiol 45:66–77.
- Nishizumi H, Sakano H. 2015. Developmental regulation of neural map formation in the mouse olfactory system. Dev Neurobiol 75:594–607.
- -Südhof TC. 2017. Synaptic neurexin complexes: a molecular code for the logic of neural circuits. Cell 171:745–769. Takahashi H, Craig AM. 2013. Protein tyrosine phosphatases
- PTPδ, PTPσ, and LAR: presynaptic hubs for synapse organization. Trends Neurosci 36:522–534.
- Thion MS, Ginhoux F, Garel S. 2018. Microglia and early brain development: an intimate journey. Science 362:185–189. Yogev S, Shen K. 2014. Cellular and molecular mechanisms
- of synaptic specificity. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 30:417–437.
- References Allen NJ. 2014. Astrocyte regulation of synaptic behavior.

Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 30:439–463.

Anderson, MJ, Cohen MW. 1977. Nerve-induced and spon-

- taneous redistribution of acetylcholine receptors on cultured muscle cells. J Physiol 268:757–773.
- Ango F, di Cristo G, Higashiyama H, Bennett V, Wu P, Huang ZJ. 2004. Ankyrin-based subcellular gradient of
- receptors and other postsynaptic components beneath the nerve terminal. Nerve-evoked activ ity also affects postsynaptic differentiation by modulating expression of postsynaptic components. Key muscle-derived organizers of presynaptic differentiation include members of the laminin and fibroblast growth factor families. 11. Central synapses develop in ways similar to those discovered at the neuromuscular junction. Many central synaptic organizers have now been dis-
- covered, including neuroligins, neurexins, protein tyrosine phosphatases, leucine-rich repeat proteins, and numerous others. 12. Many of the synapses that form initially in both the peripheral and central nervous systems are subsequently eliminated, generally by competi-
- tive, activity-dependent mechanisms. The consequence is that as circuits mature, the number of

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1208

inputs a neuron receives may decrease dramati-

cally, but the size and strength of the remaining

inputs increase even more dramatically.

13. Along with pre- and postsynaptic partners, glial cells play key roles at the synapse. In particular, both astrocytes and microglial cells receive sig-
2. nals from and send signals to developing synaptic partners, with these signals contributing to synapse formation, maturation, maintenance, and elimination.

Joshua R. Sanes

12/12/20 3:29 PM

neurofascin, an immunoglobulin family protein, directs

GABAergic innervation at Purkinje axon initial segment.

Cell 119:257–272.

- Buller AJ, Eccles JC, Eccles RM. 1960. Interactions between motoneurons and muscles in respect of the characteristic speeds of their responses. J Physiol 150:417–439.
- Burden SJ, Sargent PB, McMahan UJ. 1979. Acetylcholine receptors in regenerating muscle accumulate at original synaptic sites in the absence of the nerve. J Cell Biol
- 82:412–425. Christopherson KS, Ullian EM, Stokes CC, et al. 2005. Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted proteins that promote CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120:421–433.
- DeChiara TM, Bowen DC, Valenzuela DM, et al. 1996. The receptor tyrosine kinase MuSK is required for neuromuscular junction formation in vivo. Cell 85:501–512.
- Duan X, Krishnaswamy A, De la Huerta I, Sanes JR. 2014. Type II cadherins guide assembly of a direction-selective retinal circuit. Cell 158:793–807.
- Feng G, Tintrup H, Kirsch J, et al. 1998. Dual requirement for gephyrin in glycine receptor clustering and molybdoenzyme activity. Science 282:1321–1324.
- Fox MA, Sanes JR, Borza DB, et al. 2007. Distinct targetderived signals organize formation, maturation, and maintenance of motor nerve terminals. Cell 129:179–193.
- Gautam M, Noakes PG, Moscoso L, et al. 1996. Defective neuromuscular synaptogenesis in agrin-deficient mutant mice. Cell 85:525–535.
- Glicksman MA, Sanes JR. 1983. Differentiation of motor nerve terminals formed in the absence of muscle fibres. J Neurocytol 12:661–671.
- Graf ER, Zhang X, Jin SX, Linhoff MW, Craig AM. 2004. Neurexins induce differentiation of GABA and glutamate postsynaptic specializations via neuroligins. Cell
- 119:1013–1026. Hall ZW, Sanes JR. 1993. Synaptic structure and development: the neuromuscular junction. Cell 72:99–121. Suppl. Huang ZJ. 2006. Subcellular organization of GABAergic syn-
- apses: role of ankyrins and L1 cell adhesion molecules. Nat Neurosci 9:163–166.
- Imai T, Suzuki M, Sakano H. 2006. Odorant receptor-derived cAMP signals direct axonal targeting. Science 314:657–661. Krishnaswamy A, Yamagata M, Duan X, Hong YK, Sanes JR.
2015. Sidekick 2 directs formation of a retinal circuit that detects differential motion. Nature 2524:466–470.
- Lupa MT, Gordon H, Hall ZW. 1990. A specific effect of muscle cells on the distribution of presynaptic proteins in neurites and its absence in a C2 muscle cell variant. Dev Biol
- 142:31–43.

Kandel-Ch48\_1181-1209.indd 1209

Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses


Misgeld T, Kummer TT, Lichtman JW, Sanes JR. 2005. Agrin

promotes synaptic differentiation by counteracting an

inhibitory effect of neurotransmitter. Proc Natl Acad Sci

- U S A 102:11088–11093. Nishimune H, Sanes JR, Carlson SS. 2004. A synaptic laminincalcium channel interaction organizes active zones in motor nerve terminals. Nature 432:580–587.
- Nja A, Purves D. 1977. Re-innervation of guinea-pig superior cervical ganglion cells by preganglionic fibres arising from different levels of the spinal cord. J Physiol 272:633–651.
- Noakes PG, Gautam M, Mudd J, Sanes JR, Merlie JP. 1995. Aberrant differentiation of neuromuscular junctions in mice lacking s-laminin/laminin beta 2. Nature
- 374:258–262. Salmons S, Sreter FA. 1976. Significance of impulse activity in the transformation of skeletal muscle type. Nature 263:30–34.
- Sanes JR, Lichtman JW. 2001. Induction, assembly, maturation and maintenance of a postsynaptic apparatus. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:791–805.
- Sanes JR, Yamagata M. 2009. Many paths to synaptic specificity. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25:161–195. Schafer DP, Lehrman EK, Kautzman AG, et al. 2012. Micro-
- glia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74:691–705.
- Scheiffele P, Fan J, Choih J, Fetter R, Serafini T. 2000. Neuroligin expressed in nonneuronal cells triggers presynaptic development in contacting axons. Cell 101:657–669.
- Serizawa S, Miyamichi K, Takeuchi H, Yamagishi Y, Suzuki M, Sakano H. 2006. A neuronal identity code for the odorant receptor-specific and activity-dependent axon sorting.
- Cell 127:1057–1069. Terauchi A, Johnson-Venkatesh EM, Toth AB, Javed D, Sutton MA, Umemori H. 2010. Distinct FGFs promote differentiation of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Nature
- 465:783–787. Uezu A, Kanak DJ, Bradshaw TW, et al. 2016. Identification of an elaborate complex mediating postsynaptic inhibition. Science 353:1123–1129.
- Vaughn JE. 1989. Fine structure of synaptogenesis in the vertebrate central nervous system. Synapse 3:255–285. Yamagata M, Sanes JR. 2012. Expanding the Ig superfamily
- code for laminar specificity in retina: expression and role of contactins. J Neurosci 32:14402–14414.
- Yumoto N, Kim N, Burden SJ. 2012. Lrp4 is a retrograde signal for presynaptic differentiation at neuromuscular synapses. Nature 489:438–442.

12/12/20 3:29 PM


Experience and the Refinement of

## Synaptic Connections

Development of Human Mental Function Is Influenced by

Early Experience

Early Experience Has Lifelong Effects on Social Behaviors

## Development of Visual Perception Requires Visual Experience

Development of Binocular Circuits in the Visual Cortex

Depends on Postnatal Activity Visual Experience Affects the Structure and Function of

## the Visual Cortex Patterns of Electrical Activity Organize Binocular Circuits

Reorganization of Visual Circuits During a Critical Period Involves Alterations in Synaptic Connections

Cortical Reorganization Depends on Changes in Both

## Excitation and Inhibition Synaptic Structures Are Altered During the

Critical Period Thalamic Inputs Are Remodeled During the

Critical Period Synaptic Stabilization Contributes to Closing

the Critical Period Experience-Independent Spontaneous Neural Activity

Leads to Early Circuit Refinement Activity-Dependent Refinement of Connections Is a

## General Feature of Brain Circuitry Many Aspects of Visual System Development Are

## Activity-Dependent Sensory Modalities Are Coordinated During a

Critical Period Different Functions and Brain Regions Have Different

Critical Periods of Development

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1210

Critical Periods Can Be Reopened in Adulthood

Visual and Auditory Maps Can Be Aligned in Adults

Binocular Circuits Can Be Remodeled in Adults

Highlights

T

he human nervous system is functional at

birth—newborn babies can see, hear, breathe,

and suckle. However, the capabilities of human

infants are quite rudimentary compared to those of other species. Wildebeest calves can stand and run within minutes of birth, and many birds can fly shortly after they hatch from their eggs. In contrast, a human baby cannot lift its head until it is 2 months old, cannot bring food to its mouth until it is 6 months old, and cannot survive without parental care for a decade. What accounts for the delayed maturation of our motor, perceptual, and cognitive abilities? One main factor is that the embryonic connectivity of the nerv-

ous system, discussed in Chapters 45 through 48, is only a "rough draft" of the neural circuits that exist in our adult selves. Embryonic circuits are refined by sensory stimulation—our experiences. This two-part sequence—genetically determined connectivity followed by experience-dependent reorganization—is a common feature of mammalian neural development, but in humans, the second phase is especially prolonged. At first glance, this delay in human neural development might seem dysfunctional. It does exact a toll,

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

but it also provides an advantage. Because our mental


has been analyzed in numerous parts of the brains of

abilities are shaped largely by experience, we gain the

ability to custom fit our nervous systems to our indi-

vidual bodies and unique environments. It has been argued that it is not just the large size of the human brain but also its experience-dependent maturation that makes our mental capabilities superior to those of other species. The plasticity of the nervous system in response to experience endures throughout life. Nevertheless, periods of heightened susceptibility to modification,

known as sensitive periods, occur at particular times in development. In some cases, the adverse effects of deprivation or atypical experience during circumscribed periods in early life cannot easily be reversed by providing appropriate experience at a later age. Such periods are referred to as critical periods. As we shall see, new discoveries are blurring the distinction between sensitive and critical periods, so we will use the term "critical periods" to refer to both. Behavioral observations have helped us appreciate critical periods. Imprinting, a form of learning in birds, is one of the most striking illustrations of a

lifelong behavior established during a critical period. Just after hatching, birds become indelibly attached, or imprinted, to a prominent moving object in their environment and follow it around. This is typically their mother, but it could be an experimenter who is near the newborn chick. The process of imprinting is important for the protection of the hatchling. Although the attachment is acquired rapidly and persists, imprinting can only occur during a critical period soon after hatching—in some species, only a few hours. In humans, critical periods are evident in the ways children acquire the capacities to perceive the world around them, learn a language, or form social relation-

ships. A 5-year-old child can quickly and effortlessly learn a second language, whereas a 15-year-old adolescent may become fluent but is likely to speak with an accent, even if he lives to be 90 years old. Likewise, deaf children fitted with a cochlear implant during the first 3 to 4 years of life generally acquire and understand spoken language well, whereas neither production nor understanding may ever be normal following implantation at later ages. Such critical periods demonstrate that experience-dependent neural development is concentrated in, although certainly not confined to, early postnatal life. We begin this chapter by examining the evidence that early experience shapes a range of human mental capacities, from our ability to make sense of what we

see to our ability to engage in appropriate social interactions. The neural basis of these experiential effects

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1211

experimental animals, including the auditory, soma-

tosensory, motor, and visual systems. Here, rather

than surveying multiple systems, we will focus primarily on the visual system because research on this system has provided a particularly rich understanding of how experience shapes neural circuitry. We will see that experience is needed to refine patterns of synaptic connections and to stabilize these patterns once they have formed. Finally, we will consider recent evidence that critical periods in many systems are less restrictive than once thought and, in some cases, can be extended or even "reopened." Understanding critical periods in childhood and the extent to which they can be reopened in adulthood has many important practical consequences.

First, much educational policy is based on the idea that early experience is crucial, so it is important to know exactly when a particular form of enrichment will be optimally beneficial. Second, medical treatment of many childhood conditions, such as congenital cataracts or deafness, is now predicated on the idea that early intervention is imperative if long-lasting deficits are to be avoided. Third, there is increasing suspicion that some behavioral disorders, such as autism, may be caused by impairment of reorganization of neural circuits during critical periods. Finally, the possibility of reopening critical periods in adulthood is leading to new therapeutic approaches to neural insults, such as stroke, that previously were thought to have irreversible consequences. Development of Human Mental Function

Is Influenced by Early Experience

## Early Experience Has Lifelong Effects on Social Behaviors

## One of the first indications that early social and perceptual experiences have irreversible consequences for

human development came from studies of children

who had been deprived of these experiences early in life. In rare cases, children abandoned in the wild and later returned to human society have also been studied. As might be expected, these children were socially maladjusted, but surprisingly, the defects proved to persist throughout life. In the 1940s, the psychoanalyst René Spitz provided more systematic evidence that early interactions with other humans are essential for normal social devel -

opment. Spitz compared the development of infants raised in a foundling home with the development

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

of infants raised in a nursing home attached to a

women's prison. Both institutions were clean and both

provided adequate food and medical care. The babies

in the prison nursing home were all cared for by their mothers, who, although in prison and away from their families, tended to shower affection on their infants in the limited time allotted to them each day. In contrast, infants in the foundling home were cared for by nurses, each of whom was responsible for several babies. As a result, children in the foundling home had far less contact with other humans than did those in the prison's nursing home. The two institutions also differed in another respect. In the prison nursing home, the cribs were open, so that the infants could readily watch other

activities in the ward; they could see other babies play and observe the staff go about their business. In the foundling home, the bars of the cribs were covered by sheets that prevented the infants from seeing outside. In reality, the babies in the foundling home were living under conditions of severe sensory and social deprivation. Infants at the two institutions were followed through their early years. At the end of the first 4 months, the infants in the foundling home fared better on sev-

eral developmental tests than those in the prison nursing home, suggesting that intrinsic factors did not favor the infants in the prison nursing home. But by the end of the first year, the motor and intellectual performance of the children in the foundling home had fallen far below that of children in the prison nursing home. Many of the children in the foundling home had developed a syndrome that Spitz called hospitalism and is now sometimes called anaclitic depression. These children were withdrawn and displayed little curiosity or gaiety. Moreover, their defects extended beyond emotional and cognitive signs. They were especially prone to infection, implying that the brain exerts complex controls over the immune system as well as behavior. By their second and third years, children in the prison nursing home were similar to children raised in normal families at home—they were agile, had a vocabulary of hundreds of words, and spoke in sentences. In contrast, the development of children in the foundling home was still further delayed—many were unable to walk or to speak more than a few words. More recent studies of other similarly deprived children have confirmed these conclusions and shown that the defects are long-lasting. Longitudi-

nal studies of orphans who were raised for several years in large impersonal institutions with little or no personal care, then adopted by caring families, have been especially revealing. Despite every effort

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1212

of the adoptive parents, many of the children were

never able to develop appropriate, caring relation-

ships with family members or peers (Figure 49–1A).

More recent imaging studies have revealed defects in brain structure correlated with, and presumably due to, this deprivation (Figure 49–1B). As compelling as these observations are, it is difficult to derive definitive conclusions from them. An influential set of studies that extended the analysis

of social behavior to monkeys was carried out in the 1960s by two psychologists, Harry and Margaret Harlow. The Harlows reared newborn monkeys in isolation for 6 to 12 months, depriving them of contact with their mothers, other monkeys, or people. At the end of this period, the monkeys were physically healthy but behaviorally devastated. They crouched in a corner of their cage and rocked back and forth like autistic children (Figure 49–1C). They did not interact with other monkeys, nor did they fight, play, or show any sexual interest. Thus, a 6-month period of social isolation during the first 18 months of life produced persistent and serious disturbances in behavior. By comparison, isolation of an older animal for a comparable period was found to be without such drastic consequences. These results confirmed, under controlled conditions, the critical influence of early experience on later behavior. For ethical reasons, these studies would not be possible today. Development of Visual Perception Requires Visual Experience

## The dramatic dependence of the brain on experience and the ability of that experience to shape perception

is evident in people born with cataracts. Cataracts are

opacities of the lens that interfere with the optics of the eye but not directly with the nervous system; they are easily removed surgically. In the 1930s, it became apparent that patients who had congenital binocular cataracts removed after the age of 10 years experienced permanent deficits in visual acuity and had difficulties perceiving shape and form. In contrast, when cataracts that develop in adults are removed decades after they form, normal vision returns immediately. Likewise, children with strabismus (crossed eyes) do not have normal depth perception (stereopsis), an ability that requires the two eyes to focus on the same

location at the same time. They can acquire this ability if their eyes are aligned surgically during the first few years of life, but not if surgery occurs later in adolescence. As a result of these observations, congenital cataracts are now usually removed, and strabismus is corrected surgically, in early childhood. Over the

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Figure 49–1 Early social deprivation has a

profound impact on later brain structure and

behavior.

A. Neurocognitive dysfunction is evident in children raised under conditions of social deprivation in orphanages. The incidence of cognitive impairment

increases with the duration of stay in the orphanage. (Adapted from Behen et al. 2008.) B. Diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans show a well-developed and robust uncinate fasciculus (red region) in a normal child (left),

whereas in a socially deprived child (right), it is thin and poorly organized. (Reproduced, with permission, from Eluvathingal et al. 2006. Copyright © 2006 by the AAP.) C. Early social interactions impact later social behavior patterns. Monkeys reared in the presence of their siblings acquire social skills that permit effec-

tive interactions in later life (left). A monkey reared in isolation never acquires the capacity to interact with others and remains secluded and isolated in later life (right). (Source: Harry F. Harlow. Used with permission.)

past five decades, researchers have elucidated struc-


<!-- image -->

tural and physiological underpinnings of these criti-

cal periods.

Development of Binocular Circuits in the

Visual Cortex Depends on Postnatal Activity

## Because sensory experience of the world is transformed into patterns of electrical activity in the brain,

one might imagine that electrical signals in neural cir-

cuits affect the brain's circuitry. But is this true? And if it is true, what changes occur, and how does activity trigger them? Our most detailed understanding of these links comes from studies of the neural circuits that mediate binocular vision. The key figures in the early phases of

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1213

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

A


this work were David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel. Fol

-

lowing their pioneering studies on the structural and

functional organization of the visual cortex in cats and

monkeys (Chapter 23), they undertook another set of studies on how experience affects the circuits they had delineated. Visual Experience Affects the Structure and Function of the Visual Cortex

## In one influential study, Hubel and Wiesel raised a monkey from birth to 6 months of age with one eye-

lid sutured shut, thus depriving the animal of vision

in that eye. When the sutures were removed, it became clear that the animal was blind in the deprived eye, a condition called amblyopia. They then performed electrophysiological recordings from cells along the visual

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Right eye

ganglion neurons from each eye send axons to separate Right eye Left eye dominance columns; each column receives input from only one eye. The axons of the neurons in layer IVC project to neurons in adjacent columns as well as to neurons in the upper and lower

layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus. The axons of neurons in this nucleus project to neurons in layer IVC of the primary visual cortex, which is organized in alternating sets of ocular pathway to determine where the defect arose (Figure 49–2). They found that retinal ganglion cells in the

<!-- image -->

deprived eye, as well as neurons in the lateral genicu-

late nucleus that receive input from the deprived eye, responded well to visual stimuli and had essentially normal receptive fields. In contrast, cells in the visual cortex were fundamentally altered. In the cortex of normal animals, most neurons are responsive to binocular input. In

animals that had been monocularly deprived for the first 6 months, most cortical neurons did not respond to signals from the deprived eye (Figure 49–3). The few cortical cells that were responsive were not sufficient for visual perception. Not only had the deprived eye lost its ability to drive most cortical neurons, but little recovery ever occurred: The loss was permanent and irreversible. Hubel and Wiesel went on to test the effects of visual deprivation imposed for shorter periods and at different ages. They obtained three types of results,

depending on the timing and duration of the deprivation. First, monocular deprivation for a few weeks shortly after birth led to loss of cortical responses from the deprived eye that was reversible after the eye had been opened, especially if the opposite eye was then closed to encourage use of the initially deprived eye. Second, monocular deprivation for a few weeks during the next several weeks also resulted in a substantial loss of cortical responsiveness to signals from the deprived eye, but in this case, the effects were irreversible. Finally, deprivation in adults, even for periods of

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1214

layers of the same column. As a result, most neurons in the upper and lower layers of the cortex receive information from both eyes. many months, had no effect on the responses of cortical cells to signals from the deprived eye or on visual per-

ception. These results demonstrated that the cortical

connections that control visual perception are established within a critical period of early development. Are there anatomical correlates of these functional defects? To address this question, we need to recall three basic facts about the anatomy of the visual cortex

(Figure 49–2). First, inputs from the two eyes remain segregated in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Second, the geniculate inputs carrying information from the two eyes to the cortex terminate in alternating columns, termed ocular dominance columns. Third, lateral geniculate axons terminate on neurons in layer IVC of the primary visual cortex; convergence of input from the two eyes on a common target cell occurs at the next stage of the pathway, in cells above and below layer IVC. To examine whether the architecture of ocular dom -inance columns depends on visual experience early in postnatal life, Hubel and Wiesel deprived newborn

animals of vision in one eye and then injected a labeled amino acid into the normal eye. The injected label was incorporated into proteins in retinal ganglion cell bodies, transported along the retinal axons to the lateral geniculate nucleus, transferred to geniculate neurons, and then transported to the synaptic terminals of these axons in the primary visual cortex. After closure of one eye, the columnar array of synaptic terminals relaying input from the deprived eye was reduced, whereas the columnar array of terminals relaying input from the

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

normal eye was expanded (Figure 49–4). Thus, sensory

deprivation early in life alters the structure of the cer-

ebral cortex.

How are these striking anatomical changes brought about? Does sensory deprivation alter ocular dominance columns after they have been established,

or does it interfere with their formation? A columnar organization of the visual cortex is already evident by birth in monkeys, although the mature pattern is not achieved until several weeks after birth (Figure 49–5). Only at this time do the terminals of fibers from the lateral geniculate nucleus become completely segregated in the cortex. Because the inputs are partially but not completely segregated at the time visual deprivation exerts its effects, we can conclude that the deprivation perturbs the ability of the inputs to acquire their mature pattern. We shall return to the question of what leads to the initial, experience-independent phases of segregation in a later section of this chapter. Patterns of Electrical Activity Organize Binocular Circuits

## How does activity lead to maturation of ocular dominance columns? The crucial factor may be the

A Movement across the retina

Contralateral (right) eye Ipsilateral (left) eye

<!-- image -->









<!-- image -->

Figure 49–3 (Right) Responses of neurons in the primary

visual cortex of a monkey to visual stimuli. (Adapted from

Hubel and Wiesel 1977.)

A. A diagonal bar of light is moved leftward across the visual field, traversing the receptive fields of a binocularly responsive cell in area 17 of visual cortex. Receptive fields measured

through the right and left eye are drawn separately. The receptive fields of the two cells are similar in orientation, position, shape, and size, and respond to the same form of stimulus. Recordings (below) show that the cortical neuron responds more effectively to input from the ipsilateral eye. (Abbreviation: F, fixation point.) B. The responses of individual cortical neurons in area 17 can be classified into seven groups. Neurons receiving input only from the contralateral eye (C) fall into group 1, whereas neu-

- rons that receive input only from the ipsilateral eye (I) fall into group 7. Other neurons receive inputs from both eyes, but the input from one eye may influence the neuron much more than the other (groups 2 and 6), or the differences may be slight (groups 3 and 5). Some neurons respond equally to input from both eyes (group 4). According to these criteria, the cortical neuron shown in part A falls into group 6. C. Responsiveness of neurons in area 17 to stimulation of one or the other eye. 1. The responses of more than 1,000 neurons in area 17 in the left hemisphere of normal adult and juvenile
- monkeys. Neurons in layer IV that normally receive only monocular input have been excluded. 2. The responses of neurons in the left hemisphere of a monkey in which the contralateral (right) eye was closed from the age of 2 weeks to 18 months and then reopened. Most neurons respond only to stimulation of the ipsilateral eye.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1215

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->


Eyes

Cortical

cells


Ipsilateral

Ipsilateral

Ipsilateral

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Figure 49–4 Visual deprivation of one eye during a critical period

of development reduces the width of the ocular dominance col-

umns for that eye. (Scale bars = 1 mm) (Adapted, with permission, A Normal

from Hubel, Wiesel, and LeVay 1977.) A. A tangential section through area 17 of the right hemisphere of a normal adult monkey, 10 days after one eye was injected with a radiolabeled amino acid. Radioactivity is localized in stripes (white)

<!-- image -->

in layer IVC of the visual cortex, indicating sites of termination of the axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus that carry input from the injected eye. The alternating unlabeled (dark) stripes indicate sites of termination of the axons carrying signals from the uninjected eye. Labeled and unlabeled stripes are of equal width. B. A comparable section through the visual cortex of an 18-monthold monkey whose right eye had been surgically closed at 2 weeks of age. Label was injected into the left (open) eye. The wider (white)

stripes are the labeled terminals of afferent axons carrying signals from the open eye; the narrow (dark) stripes are terminals of axons with input from the closed eye. C. A section comparable to that in part B from an 18-month-old animal whose right eye had been shut at 2 weeks. Label was injected into the closed eye, giving rise to narrow (white) stripes of labeled axon

<!-- image -->

terminals and wide (dark) stripes of unlabeled terminals.

differences in the proportion of inputs from each eye

that converge on common target cells at birth. If by

chance the fibers conveying input from one eye are

initially more numerous in one local region of cortex, those axons may have an advantage, leading to further segregation. How might this occur? An attractive idea, based on a theory first proposed in the 1940s by Donald Hebb, is that synaptic connections are strengthened when pre-

and postsynaptic elements are active together. In the case of binocular interactions, neighboring axons from the same eye tend to fire in synchrony because they are activated by the same visual stimulus at any instant.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1216

The synchronization of their firing means that they

<!-- image -->

cooperate in the depolarization and excitation of a tar-

get cell. This cooperative action maintains the viability

of those synaptic contacts at the expense of the noncooperating synapses. Cooperative activity could also promote branching of axons and thus create the opportunity for the formation of additional synaptic connections with cells

in the target region. At the same time, the strengthening of synaptic contacts made by the axons of one eye will impede the growth of synaptic inputs from the opposite eye. In this sense, fibers from the two eyes may be said to compete for a target cell. Together,

18/01/21 6:34 PM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Figure 49–4 Visual deprivation of one eye during a critical period

of development reduces the width of the ocular dominance col-

umns for that eye. (Scale bars = 1 mm) (Adapted, with permission, A Normal

from Hubel, Wiesel, and LeVay 1977.) A. A tangential section through area 17 of the right hemisphere of a normal adult monkey, 10 days after one eye was injected with a radiolabeled amino acid. Radioactivity is localized in stripes (white)

<!-- image -->

in layer IVC of the visual cortex, indicating sites of termination of the axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus that carry input from the injected eye. The alternating unlabeled (dark) stripes indicate sites of termination of the axons carrying signals from the uninjected eye. Labeled and unlabeled stripes are of equal width. B. A comparable section through the visual cortex of an 18-monthold monkey whose right eye had been surgically closed at 2 weeks of age. Label was injected into the left (open) eye. The wider (white)

stripes are the labeled terminals of afferent axons carrying signals from the open eye; the narrow (dark) stripes are terminals of axons with input from the closed eye. C. A section comparable to that in part B from an 18-month-old animal whose right eye had been shut at 2 weeks. Label was injected into the closed eye, giving rise to narrow (white) stripes of labeled axon

<!-- image -->

terminals and wide (dark) stripes of unlabeled terminals.

differences in the proportion of inputs from each eye

that converge on common target cells at birth. If by

chance the fibers conveying input from one eye are

initially more numerous in one local region of cortex, those axons may have an advantage, leading to further segregation. How might this occur? An attractive idea, based on a theory first proposed in the 1940s by Donald Hebb, is that synaptic connections are strengthened when pre-

and postsynaptic elements are active together. In the case of binocular interactions, neighboring axons from the same eye tend to fire in synchrony because they are activated by the same visual stimulus at any instant.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1216

The synchronization of their firing means that they

<!-- image -->

cooperate in the depolarization and excitation of a tar-

get cell. This cooperative action maintains the viability

of those synaptic contacts at the expense of the noncooperating synapses. Cooperative activity could also promote branching of axons and thus create the opportunity for the formation of additional synaptic connections with cells

in the target region. At the same time, the strengthening of synaptic contacts made by the axons of one eye will impede the growth of synaptic inputs from the opposite eye. In this sense, fibers from the two eyes may be said to compete for a target cell. Together,

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Normal development of ocular

dominance columns Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections Development of ocular dominance columns after closure of one eye at different times Visual cortex layer IVC

the cortex. During normal development, layer IVC is gradually

divided into alternating sites of input from each eye. The conse-

quences of depriving sight in one eye depend on the timing of

<!-- image -->

Birth

gradual segregation of the terminals of lateral geniculate affer-

ents in layer IVC of the visual cortex under normal conditions (left) and when one eye is deprived of stimulation (right). Blue domains represent the areas of termination of inputs from one eye, red domains those of the other eye. The lengths of the domains represent the density of the terminals at each point along layer IVC. For clarity, the columns are shown here as one above the other, whereas in reality, they are side by side in cooperation and competition between axons ensure

that two populations of afferent fibers will eventually

innervate distinct regions of the primary visual cortex

with little local overlap. Competition and cooperation are not simply the outcome of neural activity per se or of differences in absolute levels of activity among axons. Instead, they

appear to depend on precise temporal patterns of activity in the competing (or cooperating) axons. The principle was dramatically illustrated by Hubel and Wiesel in a set of studies that examined stereoscopic vision—the perception of depth. The brain normally computes depth perception by comparing the disparity in retinal images between the two eyes. When the

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1217

eye closure. Closure at birth leads to dominance by the open eye (red) because at this point little segregation has occurred. Closure at 2, 3, and 6 weeks has a progressively weaker effect on the formation of ocular dominance columns because the columns become more segregated with time. (Abbreviations: L, left; R, right.) (Adapted, with permission, from Hubel, Wiesel, and LeVay 1977.) eyes are improperly aligned, this comparison cannot

be made and stereoscopy is impossible. Such mis-

alignments occur in children who are "cross-eyed," or

strabismic. As noted above, this condition can be surgically repaired, but unless the surgery occurs during the first few years of life, the children forever remain incapable of stereoscopy. Hubel and Wiesel examined the impact of strabismus on the organization of the visual system in cats. To render cats strabismic, the tendon of an extraocu -

lar muscle was severed in kittens. Both eyes remained fully functional but misaligned. Inputs from the two eyes that converged on a binocular cell in the visual cortex now carried information about different stimuli

18/01/21 6:34 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

in slightly different parts of the visual field. As a result,

cortical cells became monocular, driven by input from

one eye or the other but not both (Figure 49–6). Con-

versely, cortical neurons remained binocularly responsive following binocular visual deprivation, leading to a decrease but not an imbalance in activity arising from the two eyes. These findings suggested to Hubel and Wiesel that disruption of the synchrony of inputs led to competition rather than cooperation, so that cortical cells came to be dominated by one eye, presumably the one that had dominated at the outset. These physiological studies led investigators to test whether pharmacological blockade of electrical activity in retinal ganglion cells could affect neural

connectivity in the visual system. Activity was blocked by injecting both eyes with tetrodotoxin, a toxin that selectively blocks voltage-sensitive Na + channels. Signals from the two eyes were generated separately by direct electric stimulation of the bilateral optic nerves. In kittens, ocular dominance columns are not established if activity in retinal ganglion neurons is blocked before the critical period of development. When the two optic nerves were stimulated synchronously, ocular dominance columns still failed to form. Only when the optic nerves were stimulated asynchronously were ocular dominance columns established. If the development of ocular dominance columns indeed depends on competition between fibers from the two eyes, might it be possible to induce the forma-

tion of columns where they normally are not present, simply by establishing competition between two sets of axons? This radical possibility was tested in frogs, where retinal ganglion neurons from each eye project only to the contralateral side of the brain. In normal frogs, afferent fibers from the two eyes do not compete for the same cells, so there is no columnar segregation of afferent inputs. To generate competition, a third eye was transplanted early in larval development into a region of the frog's head near one of the normal eyes. The retinal ganglion neurons of the extra eye extended axons to the contralateral optic tectum. Remarkably, axon terminals from the transplanted and normal eyes segregated, generating a pattern of alternating columns (Figure 49–7). This finding provided dramatic support for the idea that competition between afferent axons for the same population of target neurons drives their seg-

regation into distinct target territories. The columnar segregation of retinal inputs in the frog brain is dependent on synaptic activity, presumably at the synapses between retinal axons and tectal neurons. Thus, neural activity has powerful roles in fine-tuning visual circuits.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1218

A Alignment of eyes

Normal Strabismic

<!-- image -->

mation of binocular response regions in the primary visual

cortex.

A. The eyes of strabismic cats are misaligned. (Photos [left] Steve Richardson/Alamy Stock Photo and [right] reproduced with permission from Van Sluyters and Levitt 1980.)

- B. In strabismic animals, left and right eye domains are more sharply defined, an indication of the paucity of binocular regions. (Reproduced, with permission, from Löwel 1994.
2. Copyright © 1994 Society for Neuroscience.) C. Strabismic animals have fewer binocularly tuned neurons in the visual cortex. (Reproduced, with permission, from Hubel and Wiesel 1965.)

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Figure 49–7 Ocular dominance

columns can be experimentally

induced in a frog by transplanta-

tion of a third eye. (Adapted, with permission, from Constantine-Paton and Law 1978. Copyright © 1978 AAAS.) A. Three days before the transplant, the right eye was injected with a radiolabeled amino acid. The autora -

diograph in a coronal section of the hindbrain shows the entire superficial neuropil of the left optic lobe filled with silver grains, indicating the region occupied by synaptic terminals from the labeled (contralateral) eye. B. Some time after a third eye was transplanted near the normal right eye, the right eye was injected with a

radiolabeled amino acid. The autoradio graph shows that the left optic lobe receives inputs from both the labeled eye and the transplanted eye. The normally continuous synaptic zone of the contralateral eye has become divided into alternating dark and light zones that indicate the sites of inputs from each eye.

Reorganization of Visual Circuits During a

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

A Inputs are normally segregated in the tectum

B Transplanted eye induces ocular dominance columns

<!-- image -->

Transplanted

eye

<!-- image -->

Critical Period Involves Alterations in

## Synaptic Connections The pioneering work of Hubel, Wiesel, and their colleagues showed that early experience is required for

400 µm

400 µm

<!-- image -->

Normal

eye

<!-- image -->

the preference of binocular neurons to inputs from the

ipsilateral eye (Figure 49–8).

What converts this early loss of input into a per-

manent alteration of functional capability? One idea is that thalamic axons carrying information from the

the emergence of normal structure and function in the

visual cortex. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie the critical period remained mysterious. In recent years, many investigators have begun addressing these issues. Much of their work has involved the use of mice, because mice are more ame nable to mechanistic analysis than the cats and monkeys studied by Hubel, Wiesel, and their disciples. Cortical Reorganization Depends on Changes in Both Excitation and Inhibition

## Unlike cats and monkeys, most of the mouse visual cortex receives only contralateral input and its binocular

region is not divided into ocular dominance columns.

Nonetheless, the small binocular region contains a mixture of monocularly and binocularly driven neurons, and closure of the contralateral eye during the critical period for ocular dominance markedly shifts

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1219

-deprived eye lose their ability to activate cortical neurons. However, although a decrease in efficacy of the thalamocortical synapse may contribute to this effect, this is not the whole story. Each thalamic axon carries input from only one eye (Figure 49–2). Because loss of responsiveness to the deprived eye occurs only if the other eye remains active, one might imagine that the earliest changes would occur at the first site where inputs from the two eyes have the opportunity to interact. Consistent with this idea, the first physiological changes are not observed in layer IV neurons, each of which receives input from only one eye. Rather, they occur in the binocular neurons of layers II/III and V, which receive convergent input from both right eye– and left eye– driven monocular layer IV neurons. This implies that the loss of cortical responsiveness to the deprived eye results from a circuit alteration rather than from a simple loss of input. Several possible cellular mechanisms have been proposed to account for these changes in circuitry.

18/01/21 6:34 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior


Contralateral Ipsilateral

Ipsi

<!-- image -->

A. The visual cortex in mice contains a small region that receives One eye closed during Contralateral Ipsilateral normal critical period and then reopened, inputs from that eye are underrepresented, and many more neurons respond to

<!-- image -->

thalamic (lateral geniculate nucleus [LGN]) inputs from both eyes. In this binocular region, most neurons are predominantly responsive to contralateral eye input, fewer respond to binocular inputs, and very few respond to ipsilateral eye input only. First, excitatory synapses within the primary visual

cortex may weaken because of the decreased input

from the closed eye, perhaps through long-term

depression (LTD) (Chapter 53). Second, excitatory synapses carrying input from the open eye may become stronger. Third, the strength of inhibitory synapses may be altered, leading to a net decrease in the level of excitation of cortical neurons by inputs from the closed eye or a net increase in excitation from the open eye. Fourth, neuromodulation within the cortex may tune the circuit in more subtle ways, altering the balance between excitation and inhibition. Careful analysis of neurons in mouse cortex has provided insight into roles played by some of these mechanisms. During the first few days after clos-

ing one eye, responses to input from the closed eye are greatly weakened, with no major effect on inputs from the open eye. The weakening results from a process like LTD or a closely related phenomenon called spike timing–dependent plasticity (STDP). Then, over the following few days, responses to inputs from the open eye become stronger. The increase results from

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1220

binocular or ipsilateral eye input. Eye closure before or after the time of the normal critical period does not elicit the same shift in responsiveness.

a combination of synaptic changes called long-term

potentiation and homeostatic plasticity. Homeostatic

plasticity is a circuit mechanism that endeavors to

maintain a steady level of input to neurons. In this case, loss of excitatory drive from the closed eye leads to a compensatory increase in excitatory drive from the open eye. Further studies demonstrated that inhibitory interneurons have an important role in the timing of the critical period. Maturation of inhibitory input onto vis-

ual cortical neurons coincides with the beginning of the critical period. Moreover, manipulations that lead to earlier development of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) signaling result in advancing the critical period (Figure 49–9). Conversely, delaying GABA signaling delays the period in which monocular deprivation enhances the preference for ipsilateral eye input (Figure 49–9). Together these results and others suggest that a sufficient level of inhibitory input plays a critical role in "gating" the opening of the critical period, whereas excitatory mechanisms may play a more prominent role in enacting the alterations that occur during the critical period.

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Deprivation before normal critical period

Control Binocular vision

<!-- image -->

Control Enhanced GABA

Contralateral Ipsilateral

Delayed GABA

Contralateral Ipsilateral

<!-- image -->

GABA function

enhanced

Normal

GABA function

delayed

Plasticity

of GABAergic neurotransmission. Altering the status of

γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synthesis and signaling shifts the period in which monocular deprivation can change the response properties of neurons in the visual cortex. Enhancing GABA signaling (through administration of benzodiazepines) shifts the critical period for monocular deprivation to an earlier developmental time. In contrast, delaying GABA signaling (by reducing GABA synthesis genetically and then administering benzodiazepines at a later time) shifts the critical period for monocular deprivation to a later developmental time. (Adapted from Hensch et al. 1998.)

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1221

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

Synaptic Structures Are Altered During the

Critical Period

## Many studies have sought structural changes that correlate with the altered responsiveness of the visual cor-

tex to input from the closed and open eyes. Particular

attention has been paid to dendritic spines as potential sites of plasticity. Spines are small protrusions from the dendrites of many cortical neurons on which excitatory synapses form. They are dynamic structures, and their appear-

ance and loss are thought to reflect the formation and elimination of synapses. Spine motility is especially marked during early postnatal development, and increases in spine dynamics and number have been associated with changes in behavior. Striking alterations in the motility and number of dendritic spines on neurons in the mouse visual cortex are observed following closure of one eye. Two days after

-

eye closure in young mice, the motility and turnover of dendritic spines on neurons in the visual cortex increases, suggesting that synaptic connections are beginning to rearrange (Figure 49–10). A few days later, the number of spines begins to change; the number of spines on the apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons decreases initially, but after longer periods of deprivation increases again. These alterations in spine motility and number can be correlated with three known features of the criti cal period. First, rather than occurring in layer IV, the

changes occur primarily in superficial and deep layers of the cortex, where binocular cells lie. Second, they occur only in the portion of the visual cortex that normally receives binocular input. Third, they fail to occur following eye closure in adult mice (Figure 49–10). Together, these results support a linkage of spine dynamics with critical period plasticity. According to one model, spine motility may result from the imbal-

ance of inputs to binocular neurons from the open and closed eyes, and it may reflect the first stages in synaptic rearrangement. In turn, the loss of spines, and presumably of synapses, corresponds in time and space to the loss of input from the closed eye and may provide a structural basis for the permanence of this loss. The later growth of new spines occurs as or after responsiveness to the open eye increases and may underlie the adaptive rearrangement that permits the cortex to make the best use of the input available to it. Thalamic Inputs Are Remodeled During

the Critical Period

## How are local changes in spines related to the largescale structural changes in ocular dominance columns

18/01/21 6:34 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Figure 49–10 The motility of dendritic

spines in the mouse visual cortex changes

after one eye is closed.  The dendrites of

pyramidal neurons in the visual cortex have many spines, the density of which remains comparatively constant under normal conditions. Closure of one eye (contralateral in this example) during the critical period for binocular development enhances the motility of dendritic spines and, over time, results in an increase in the proportion of spines that receive synaptic input from the open eye. Similar changes in spine motility are not observed if the eye is closed after the critical period. (Adapted from Oray, Majewska, and Sur 2004.)

shown in Figure 49–4? When developing axons from

<!-- image -->

the lateral geniculate nucleus first reach the cortex, the

terminal endings of several neurons overlap exten-

sively. Each fiber extends a few branches over an area of the visual cortex that spans several future ocular dominance columns. As the cortex matures, axons retract some branches, expand others, and even form new branches (Figure 49–11A). With time, each geniculate neuron becomes connected almost exclusively to a group of neighboring cortical neurons within a single column. The arbors

become segregated into columns through the pruning or retraction of certain axons and the sprouting of others. This dual process of axon retraction and sprouting occurs widely throughout the nervous system during development. What happens after one eye is closed? Axons from a closed eye are at a disadvantage, and a greater

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1222

Responsive to

contralateral inputs

ipsilateral inputs

Long after closure

than normal proportion retract. At the same time,

axons from the open eye sprout new terminals at sites

vacated by fibers that would otherwise convey input

from the closed eye (Figure 49–11B). If an animal is deprived of the use of one eye early during the critical period of axonal segregation, the normal processes of axon retraction and outgrowth are perturbed. In contrast, if an animal is deprived of the use of one eye after the ocular dominance columns are almost fully segregated, axons conveying input from the open eye actually sprout collaterals in regions of the cortex that they had vacated earlier (see Figure 49–5). Initially, it was believed that rearrangements of thalamocortical axons in monocularly deprived animals caused the changes in cortical responsiveness

to the open and closed eyes. We now know, through electrophysiological recording and imaging of spines, that physiological changes and synaptic alterations

18/01/21 6:34 PM

A Normal development

<!-- image -->

(Adapted, with permission, from Antonini and Stryker 1993.

Copyright © 1993 AAAS.) A. During normal postnatal development, the axons of lateral geniculate nucleus cells branch widely in the visual precede the large-scale axonal rearrangements. So

rather than causing the physiological changes, axonal

remodeling may contribute to making these changes

enduring and irreversible. The question then becomes: How do alterations in synaptic structure and function within the cortex lead to alterations in the input? One idea is that synaptic activity regulates the secretion of neurotrophic factors by cortical neurons. Such factors may then regulate survival of some neu-

rons at the expense of others (Chapter 46) or promote the expansion of some axonal arbors at the expense of others. One such factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is synthesized and secreted by cortical neurons, and administering excess BDNF or interfering with its receptor trkB modifies the formation of ocular dominance columns. Nevertheless, interpreting the actions of BDNF is not straightforward. BDNF and trkB signaling affect the cortex in many ways, including enhancing the growth of thalamocortical axons. BDNF can also speed the maturation of inhibitory circuits, which, as noted above, can influence plasticity. It remains unclear whether BDNF is a specific catalyst of the competition that preferentially promotes expansion of some arbors. Synaptic Stabilization Contributes to Closing the Critical Period

## A hallmark of critical periods is that the interval in which experience affects the development of neural

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1223

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

B Development after eye closure

<!-- image -->

B. After one eye is closed, the terminal arbors of neurons in the

pathway from that eye are dramatically smaller compared to those of the open eye.

circuits is limited. What brings this period of height-

ened plasticity to a close?

Since synapses and circuits are labile during criti-

cal periods, investigators have sought developmental changes in cortex that could lead to stabilization. One

parameter is the state of myelination of axons, which occurs around the time the critical period closes. Formation of myelin creates physical barriers to sprouting and axonal growth. Moreover, as discussed in detail in Chapter 50, myelin contains factors such as Nogo and myelin-associated glycoprotein that actively inhibit growth of axons. In mutant mice lacking Nogo or one of its receptors, NogoR, the critical period remains open into adulthood, suggesting that the appearance of these receptors normally contributes to closing the critical period (Figure 49–12). Another possible agent of closure is the perineuronal net, a web of glycosaminoglycans that wraps certain classes of inhibitory neurons. These nets form

around the time that the critical period closes. Infusion of the enzyme chondroitinase, which digests perineuronal nets, maintains plasticity. Thus, critical periods may close once molecular barriers to synaptic growth and rearrangement come into play. Additional agents of closure may be intrinsic to the neurons. In Chapter 50, we will see that neuronal growth programs decrease with age, and in Chapter 51,

we will describe epigenetic mechanisms that "lock in" experience-dependent patterns of gene expression established in early postnatal life.

18/01/21 6:34 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Nogo or NogoR mutant

Ipsi

Extended critical period

(Nogo / NogoR mutants)

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1224

Why should there be an end to critical periods?

Would it not be advantageous for the brain to maintain

its ability to remodel into adulthood? Perhaps not—the

ability of our brain to adapt to variations in sensory input, to gradual physical growth (eg, increases in the distance between the eyes affecting binocular correspondence), and to various congenital disorders is a valuable asset. At an extreme, if one eye is lost, it is advantageous to devote all available cortical real estate to the remaining eye. However, one would not want wholesale reorganization, possibly accompanied by loss of skills and memories, if vision through one eye were lost temporarily in adulthood due to disease or injury. So, enhancing plasticity during a critical period may represent an adaptive compromise between flexibility and stability. Experience-Independent Spontaneous Neural

Activity Leads to Early Circuit Refinement

## As noted above, the segregation of visual cortex into ocular dominance columns in cats and monkeys begins

before the onset of visual experience. What drives this

early phase of segregation? One possibility is that axons from the ipsilateral and contralateral eyes bear different molecular labels that lead to their association. A similar mechanism occurs in the formation of the olfactory projection (Chapter 48). However, no such molecule or mechanism has yet been discovered in the visual projection. Instead segregation appears to rely on spontaneous activity, which not only occurs prior to sensory input but also exhibits striking patterning. This mechanism was initially discovered in studies of the lateral geniculate nucleus, whose neurons provide visual input to the visual cortex. The arbors of retinal ganglion cells from the two eyes are segregated into alternating layers in the lateral geniculate nucleus, much as the projections from this

Figure 49–12 (Left) The critical period for monocular depnucleus are segregated in alternating ocular dominance

rivation is extended in mice lacking Nogo signaling.  The

drawings show arborization patterns of thalamocortical axons

carrying signals from contralateral and ipsilateral eyes to the binocular zone in visual cortex. Monocular deprivation during the critical period results in a shift in ocular preference in neurons in the binocular zone in both wild-type mice and mice mutant for Nogo or the Nogo receptor (NogoR). After the normal critical period (at 45 days), the shift in ocular preference continues in mice with mutant Nogo-A or the Nogo receptor but not in wild-type mice. The plot shows that elimination of Nogo signaling prevents closure of the critical period. (Adapted from McGee et al. 2005.)

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Diffuse projection

normal development. At early stages of development, the ter-

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

Segregation into

eye-specic laminae Segregation into functional sublaminae

minals of axons from each eye intermingle, but at later stages, columns in the visual cortex (Figure 49–13). In both

<!-- image -->

structures, individual axons at first form terminals

in multiple domains (layers in the geniculate nucleus,

columns in the cortex). Later, the terminals become segregated by a process of refinement. The refinement involves both growth of terminal arbors in the "appropriate" layer and elimination of terminals from the inappropriate layer (Chapter 48). As in the cortex, application of tetrodotoxin to the optic nerves disrupts the segregation of the inputs from each eye, indicating that activity is essential for

segregation. In contrast to cortex, however, segregation of inputs is complete before the onset of visual experience—prior to birth in monkeys and postnatally but prior to eye opening in mice. Thus, vision cannot drive the neural activity essential for segregation. It turns out that the axons of retinal ganglion neurons are spontaneously active in utero, well before the eyes open. Neighboring ganglion cells fire in synchro-

nous bursts that last a few seconds, followed by silent periods that may last for minutes. Sampling the activity of retinal ganglion neurons across the entire retina revealed that these bursts propagate across much of the retina in a wave-like manner (Figure 49–14). This pattern of ganglion cell activity appears to be coordinated by excitatory inputs from amacrine cells in the overlying layer of the retina (Chapter 22). The spontaneous, synchronous firing of a select group of ganglion neurons excites a local group of neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Such syn-

chronized activity appears to strengthen these synapses at the expense of other nearby synapses, perhaps by a Hebbian mechanism similar to that posited for experience-dependent refinement. This does not mean

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1225


Right eye

Left eye

specialized sublayers (on and off layers in ferrets). (Adapted,

with permission, from Sanes and Yamagata 1999.) that visually evoked activity has no role in sculpting

the retinogeniculate pathway. At a later stage, other

aspects of refinement, such as spatial rearrangement

of synapses along the axon, are regulated by visual experience. The discovery that spontaneous activity can lead to circuit refinement provides a likely explanation for the initial segregation of inputs to the visual cortex.

More generally, the parsing of activity-dependent circuit refinement into two phases, the first dependent on spontaneous activity and the second on sensory input, now appears to be a general theme in the development of brain circuits that begin refinement before they have the chance to respond to environmental stimulation. Activity-Dependent Refinement of Connections

Is a General Feature of Brain Circuitry

## We have seen that neural activity is critical for segregating axons from the two retinas into distinct layers in

the lateral geniculate nucleus and then into distinct col-

umns in the visual cortex. Is this developmental role of activity a special case, or does activity also affect maturation elsewhere in the visual system, and even in other parts of the brain? Studies of many systems show that activity-dependent control of refinement is a general property of neural circuits in the mammalian brain. Many Aspects of Visual System Development Are Activity-Dependent

## One well-studied example of activity-dependent development in the visual system is the sharpening

18/01/21 6:34 PM
Diffuse projection

normal development. At early stages of development, the ter-

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

Segregation into

eye-specic laminae Segregation into functional sublaminae

minals of axons from each eye intermingle, but at later stages, columns in the visual cortex (Figure 49–13). In both

<!-- image -->

structures, individual axons at first form terminals

in multiple domains (layers in the geniculate nucleus,

columns in the cortex). Later, the terminals become segregated by a process of refinement. The refinement involves both growth of terminal arbors in the "appropriate" layer and elimination of terminals from the inappropriate layer (Chapter 48). As in the cortex, application of tetrodotoxin to the optic nerves disrupts the segregation of the inputs from each eye, indicating that activity is essential for

segregation. In contrast to cortex, however, segregation of inputs is complete before the onset of visual experience—prior to birth in monkeys and postnatally but prior to eye opening in mice. Thus, vision cannot drive the neural activity essential for segregation. It turns out that the axons of retinal ganglion neurons are spontaneously active in utero, well before the eyes open. Neighboring ganglion cells fire in synchro-

nous bursts that last a few seconds, followed by silent periods that may last for minutes. Sampling the activity of retinal ganglion neurons across the entire retina revealed that these bursts propagate across much of the retina in a wave-like manner (Figure 49–14). This pattern of ganglion cell activity appears to be coordinated by excitatory inputs from amacrine cells in the overlying layer of the retina (Chapter 22). The spontaneous, synchronous firing of a select group of ganglion neurons excites a local group of neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Such syn-

chronized activity appears to strengthen these synapses at the expense of other nearby synapses, perhaps by a Hebbian mechanism similar to that posited for experience-dependent refinement. This does not mean

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1225


Right eye

Left eye

specialized sublayers (on and off layers in ferrets). (Adapted,

with permission, from Sanes and Yamagata 1999.) that visually evoked activity has no role in sculpting

the retinogeniculate pathway. At a later stage, other

aspects of refinement, such as spatial rearrangement

of synapses along the axon, are regulated by visual experience. The discovery that spontaneous activity can lead to circuit refinement provides a likely explanation for the initial segregation of inputs to the visual cortex.

More generally, the parsing of activity-dependent circuit refinement into two phases, the first dependent on spontaneous activity and the second on sensory input, now appears to be a general theme in the development of brain circuits that begin refinement before they have the chance to respond to environmental stimulation. Activity-Dependent Refinement of Connections

Is a General Feature of Brain Circuitry

## We have seen that neural activity is critical for segregating axons from the two retinas into distinct layers in

the lateral geniculate nucleus and then into distinct col-

umns in the visual cortex. Is this developmental role of activity a special case, or does activity also affect maturation elsewhere in the visual system, and even in other parts of the brain? Studies of many systems show that activity-dependent control of refinement is a general property of neural circuits in the mammalian brain. Many Aspects of Visual System Development Are Activity-Dependent

## One well-studied example of activity-dependent development in the visual system is the sharpening

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Imaging retinal activity C Superimposed retinal waves

<!-- image -->

developing retina.

A. Microscopic visualization of the activity of retinal ganglion

neurons in a flat-mounted preparation of mammalian retina. Spontaneous waves of neural activity are visualized by moni2+

toring Ca transients (yellow domain) after loading of cells with dyes that change their fluorescent emission spectrum in response to changes in intracellular Ca 2+ concentration. B. These still images from a movie sequence show the propagation of one Ca 2+ activity focus (yellow domain) across the

of the topographic distribution of retinal ganglion cell

axons onto their central targets, a topic we introduced

in Chapter 47. In vertebrates, molecular cues such as

ephrins guide axons from the retina to appropriate sites in the optic tectum (called the superior colliculus in mammals—see Figure 47–11), but they are not sufficient to form the refined visual map. Histological and physiological studies have found that the map formed initially in the superior colliculus/optic tectum is coarse and that individual

retinal ganglion cell axons have large, overlapping arbors. These axonal arbors are later pruned to their mature size, resulting in a more restricted and precise

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1226

+ 8

retina. Images were taken 1 second apart. Many cells within

the activity focus are activated synchronously. (Reproduced,

with permission, from Blankenship et al. 2009. Copyright ©

2009 Elsevier Inc.) C. Retinal activity waves recorded over time are superimposed in this image. Discrete waves are indicated in different colors; the origin of a wave is indicated by a darker hue. These

waves originate in different retinal foci and spread in distinct, unpredictable directions. (Reproduced, with permission, from Meister et al. 1991. Copyright © 1991 AAAS.) field of termination. If retinal activity is inhibited, only

the initial coarse map forms.

Is it the pattern of activity or activity itself that is

important in visual map formation? Put another way, is activity simply a precondition for refinement, or does

it have an organizing role, determining exactly which axons win or lose the competition? Many experiments show that the latter idea is closer to the truth. In one study, the accuracy of the retinotectal map was assessed in fish raised in a tank illuminated only by brief flashes from a strobe light. A control group

was raised in a normal laboratory environment. The total light intensity presented to the fish was similar

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

under both conditions, but the resulting pattern was


mapped in an orderly way within relevant brain areas,

very different. In control fish, the images fell haphaz-

ardly on various parts of the retina as the fish swam

around their tanks. This input produces local synchronous activity of the sort generated by the waves of spontaneous activity described above—neighboring ganglion cells tend to fire together, but there is little correlation with the firing patterns of distant ganglion cells. In these fish, the map becomes precise. In contrast, stroboscopic illumination synchronously activates nearly all of the ganglion cells, and in these fish, the retinotectal map remains coarse. Presumably, the tectum determines which retinal axons are near neighbors by judging which ones fire in synchrony, much as activity patterns in the lateral

geniculate nucleus or visual cortex determine which axons carry signals from the same eye. This information is then used to refine the topographic map, through mechanisms similar to those in the cortex. When all of the axons fire in synchrony, the tectum cannot determine which axons are neighbors; refinement fails, and the map remains coarse. Sensory Modalities Are Coordinated During a Critical Period

## Our experience of the world is shaped by synthesizing sensory input from multiple modalities. For example,

our mental image of where an object is with respect to

our body is the same whether we localize it by touch, sound, or sight. For each modality, information is

Figure 49–15 The barn owl uses interaural

time differences to localize its prey. Sound

waves generated by movements of a mouse are

received by the owl's left and right ears. As the prey emits noise, the difference in the time of arrival of auditory stimuli at the two ears—the interaural time difference (ITD)—is used to cal -culate the precise position of the prey target. (Reproduced, with permission, from Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1227

much like the retinotopic maps in the optic tectum and

visual cortex. Multimodal localization requires that

these maps, which are formed independently during development, be brought into register. This aspect of refinement occurs during critical periods. Studies on barn owls have provided insight into how auditory and visual maps are coordinated during a critical period. During the day, owls use vision to

localize their prey—mice or other small rodents—but at night, they rely on auditory cues, and at dusk, both sensory channels are used. The localization of sound must be precise if owls are to succeed in finding prey, and it is intuitively obvious that the visual and auditory cues for the same location need to be consistent. Auditory localization in owls, as in people, results from the presence of neurons that vary in their sensitivity to sounds sensed by the two ears. For example,

sounds arising from a source to the left arrive slightly sooner at the left ear than at the right ear and are slightly louder in the left ear. These discrepancies help us determine the point in horizontal space from which a sound arises (Chapter 28). Computation of the temporal difference in the arrival of sounds at the two ears is particularly crucial. The difference is only a few tens of microseconds, as expected from calculations based upon the speed of sound and the width of the head. Remarkably, the auditory system is sensitive to these extremely short interaural time differences (ITDs) and can calculate prey position from them (Figure 49–15). Moreover, many auditory neurons in the optic tectum

<!-- image -->

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

with receptive fields centered on a particular location

are also tuned to ITDs that correspond to sounds emit-

ted from that same point in space. The registration is

imprecise at early stages but becomes progressively more precise during early adolescence as a consequence of the animal's experience. Crucial insight into how this registration occurs came from experiments in which prisms were mounted over the eyes of young owls. The prisms shifted the

retinal image horizontally so that the visual map in the tectum reflected a world systematically displaced from its "actual" orientation. This change abruptly disrupted the correspondence between visual and auditory receptive fields. Over the next several weeks, however, the ITD to which tectal neurons responded optimally, ie, their auditory receptive field, changed until the visual and auditory maps came back into register (Figure 49–16). Thus, the visual map instructs the auditory map. Further experiments showed that this reorganization resulted from rewiring of connections between two deeper auditory nuclei (Figure 49–17). When

prism goggles were placed on young owls, changes in ITD tuning were fully adaptive in that the animals compensated completely for the effects of the prisms. In contrast, goggles placed on mature owls (older than 7 months of age) had little effect. Thus, reorganization of this auditory projection occurs optimally during a critical juvenile period. Different Functions and Brain Regions Have Different Critical Periods of Development

## Not all brain circuits are stabilized at the same time. Even within the visual cortex, the critical periods for

organization of inputs differ among layers in both mice

Figure 49–16 (Right) Reorganization of sensory maps in the

optic tectum of owls after systematic displacement of the

retinal image.  The retinal image in adolescent owls can be

displaced by prism goggles, which shift images from 5° to 30°. (Adapted, with permission, from Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.) A. Before application of the prisms, the visual and auditory neural maps coincide. B. The prism goggles displace the retinal image by 23°. Conse-

- quently, the neural and auditory maps are out of alignment. C. The two brain maps are once again congruent 42 days after
- prism application because the auditory map has shifted to realign with the visual map.
- D. Soon after the prisms are removed, the visual map reverts to its original position, but the auditory map remains in its shifted position.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1228

<!-- image -->

Head orientation

in response to:

Auditory stimuli

Visual stimuli

mutations

R

R

R

R

20 30




18/01/21 6:34 PM

A Normal Visual-eld azimuth

barn owl. (Adapted from Knudsen 2002.)

A. The auditory pathway in a normal owl. The interaural time difference (ITD) is measured and mapped in frequency-specific channels in the brain stem. This information ascends to the infe

-

rior colliculus, where a neural map of auditory space is created.

and monkeys. As an example, the neural connections

in layer IVC of the visual cortex of the monkey are not

affected by monocular deprivation by the time the

animal is 2 months old. In contrast, connections in the upper and lower layers continue to be influenced by sensory experience (or lack of it) for almost the entire first year after birth. Critical periods for other features of the visual system, such as orientation tuning, occur at different developmental stages (Figure 49–18A). The timing of critical periods also varies between brain regions (Figure 49–18B). The adverse consequences of sensory deprivation for the primary sen-

sory regions of the brain are generally fully realized early in postnatal development. In contrast, social experience can affect the intracortical connections over a much longer period. These differences may explain why certain types of learning are optimal at particular stages of development. For example, certain cognitive capacities—language, music, and mathematics—usually must be acquired well before puberty if they are to develop at all. In addition, insults to the brain at specific early stages of postnatal life may selectively affect the development of certain perceptual abilities and behavior.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1229

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

B Animal wearing

prism goggles C After auditory remapping

20°

prisms

<!-- image -->


°40

°

60°

Realigned

visual and

auditory

maps

B. After an owl is fitted with prism goggles, the visual and audi-

tory space maps in the optic tectum become misaligned. C. After reorganization of auditory maps, the visual and auditory

- maps are once again in alignment.

Critical Periods Can Be Reopened

in Adulthood

## By definition, critical periods are limited in time. Nevertheless, they are less sharply defined than originally

thought. Extending or reopening critical periods in

adulthood could increase brain plasticity and make it possible to facilitate recovery from strokes and other insults that impair discrete regions of the nervous system. Some of the first evidence for plasticity in the adult cortex came from studies by Merzenich and colleagues on the representation of the fingers of monkeys in

the somatosensory cortex. Recordings of neuronal receptive fields in normal adult animals showed that each digit is mapped in an orderly way on the cortical surface, with abrupt discontinuities between areas responding to different digits (Figure 49–19A). Amputation of a digit left the cortical representation of that digit initially unresponsive, but after several months, areas serving the neighboring digits filled in the gap (Figure 49–19B). Much as happens in the visual cortex following monocular deprivation, the somatosensory map was readjusted so that the cortex could devote

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Figure 49–18 The timing of critical periods varies

with brain function. (Reproduced, with permission,

from Hensch 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)

A. In cats, the critical periods for development of orientation or direction selectivity in visual neurons occur earlier than those for establishment of ocular domi nance and slow-wave sleep oscillation.

B. In humans, the timing of periods for development of sensory processing, language, and cognitive functions varies.

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Critical periods for visual function in cats

Orientation

or direction

selectivity

<!-- image -->

Sensory pathways

(vision, hearing)

Slow-wave

sleep oscillations

Other cognitive

function

<!-- image -->

most of its resources to useful inputs. Conversely,

when two fingers were sutured together so they

15 years

First, when adult owls that had worn goggles as

adolescents are refitted with the goggles, the auditory

received coincident input, a swath of cortex on both

sides of the border between the two digit areas eventually became responsive to both areas (Figure 49–19C). This result suggests that, as in the visual system, borders may result from competition and can be blurred when competition declines. What was most surprising was that these effects occurred in adulthood, long after all known critical periods had closed. In the years since Merzenich's studies, evidence has accumulated that critical periods can be reopened in many systems. We illustrate this principle by return-

ing to two areas in which critical periods have been well mapped, the optic tectum in the owl and the visual cortex in the mouse. Visual and Auditory Maps Can Be Aligned in Adults

In initial studies of the matching of auditory and

## visual maps in owls, realignment following displacement of the visual field with prism goggles was largely

restricted to an early sensitive period (Figures 49–16 and 49–17). However, three strategies dramatically enhance binaural tuning plasticity in adult owls.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1230

map again shifts to align with the new visual map

(Figure 49–20A). In contrast, in adult owls that had not worn the goggles as adolescents, the use of goggles has little effect on the organization of the auditory map. Thus, the events of map rearrangement during the normal critical period must leave a neural trace that permits rearrangement later in life. In fact, in the owls that wore prisms in early life, axons to auditory nuclei that were normally pruned were maintained, providing a structural basis for the reorganization in adulthood. A second method for inducing late plasticity is to displace the retinal image in small steps by having the owl wear a series of prism spectacles of progressively

increasing strength. Under these conditions, adjustment of the auditory map is typically three- to fourfold greater than the response to a single large displacement of the retinal image (Figure 49–20B). The third technique is to allow owls to hunt live prey. In earlier experiments, animals were housed and fed under standard laboratory conditions. However,

when adult prism-wearing owls are allowed to capture live mice under low light conditions for 10 weeks, they exhibit far greater plasticity of binaural tuning

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Ocular

dominance

Language Legs Trunk Arm Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1231

<!-- image -->

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections


than owls fed dead mice (Figure 49–19C), albeit less

than that exhibited by juvenile owls that did not hunt.

The finding that hunting increases the plasticity of bin-

aural tuning in adult owls dramatically demonstrates that behavioral context affects the ability of the nervous system to reorganize. Whether this effect results from increased sensory information, attention, arousal, motivation, or reward needs to be resolved. Binocular Circuits Can Be Remodeled in Adults

As the body of observations on monocular deprivation

## grew, it became apparent that some plasticity persisted

beyond the classical critical period in cats, rats, and mice.

In mice, for example, modest shifts in ocular dominance occur even when one eye is deprived of vision at 2 or 3 months of age. By 4 months of age, however, monocular deprivation has no detectable effect. Over the past decade, several interventions have been discovered that enhance the extent of ocular dominance plasticity in young adults and even enable

Digit 5

Digit 5 substantial plasticity in older animals. Some are noninvasive: Environmental enrichment, social interaction (via group housing), visual stimulation, and exercise all increase the magnitude and speed of changes that occur following monocular deprivation in adults. A second group of interventions targets mechanisms that appear to affect the timing of the normal critical period. As noted above, treating the cortex with chondroitinase to disrupt perineuronal nets or interference with the inhibitory effects of myelin on axonal growth can both extend and reopen the critical period. Remarkably, transplantation of immature inhibitory interneurons into the visual cortex also reopens the critical period even in 6-month-old mice. How can we reconcile the strong evidence for critical periods with the newer evidence for reorganization

Figure 49–19 (Left) Representation of digits in somatosensory cortex can be remapped in adult monkeys. (Adapted, with per-

mission, from Merzenich et al. 1984 and Allard et al. 1991.)

A. Lightly touching specific spots on the digits (left) elicits responses from neurons in somatosensory cortex (right), revealing orderly topographic maps of each digit on the cortiDigit 5

cal surface. Abrupt discontinuities distinguish regions serving adjacent digits. B. Following amputation of a digit, the cortical region it previously supplied is left unresponsive. Several months later, axons from the adjacent digits (2 and 4) have formed synaptic connec-

- tions in the unresponsive area. C. After digits 3 and 4 have been sutured together, they received simultaneous sensory stimulation, and cortical regions at the border between areas representing the digits become
- responsive to both.

Digit 4

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A The effect of early experience

Sensitive period


<!-- image -->


## µ s) 25

No hunting With hunting

Figure 49–20 Different behavioral conditions have different auditory map is successfully brought into alignment. The dot-

effects on the realignment of visual and auditory neural

maps in the mature barn owl.

<!-- image -->

ted line shows the extent of realignment if the animal is fitted

with a 23° prism on day 0. (Reproduced, with permission, from

A. The remodeling of the auditory maps that results from wearing prism goggles for a brief period during adolescence leaves a neural trace that can be reactivated in the adult. When these

birds are fitted with the goggles as adults, the auditory map is still able to realign with the visual map. (Abbreviation: ITD interaural time difference.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.) B. When an animal is fitted with a series of prisms, each of which produces a small displacement in the visual image, the

, Linkenhoker and Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.) C. If an adult owl has the opportunity to hunt live prey while wearing prism goggles, auditory remapping occurs, perhaps because of enhanced motivation to sharpen perception.

(Reproduced, with permission, from Bergan et al. 2005. Copyright © 2005 Society for Neuroscience.)

of circuitry in adults? The plasticity observed in adults is modest and slow compared to that seen during the

critical period, and its mechanisms differ in some

respects from those for earlier deprivation. These differences result from two factors. First, from early postnatal life into adolescence, the molecular environment in the brain is conducive to axonal growth, and cellular mechanisms are optimal for promoting the formation, strengthening, weakening, and elimination of synapses. Under these conditions, circuits can readily change in response to experience. Conversely, in mature circuits, molecular and structural elements

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1232

promote stability and impede plasticity. Second, in a

developing circuit, no particular pattern of connectiv-

ity is firmly entrenched, so there is less to overcome.

The connections specified by genetic determinants are less precise, and the connections themselves are relatively weak. The patterns of neural activity that result from experience sharpen and even realign these patterns of connectivity. In sum, experience during critical periods has a potent effect on circuits because the cellular and molecular conditions are optimal for plasticity and because

the instructed pattern of connectivity does not have

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Adulthood B The effect of incremental change



s)

µ

°

<!-- image -->


## 17

°


°

120 140


Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

to compete with a long-existing pattern. These differ-


inputs from the other eye. Postnatally, synchrony is

ences help explain the special behavioral, pharmaco-

logical, or genetic interventions needed to stimulate

plasticity in adults. Highlights

1.

Although the nervous system is malleable

throughout life, plasticity is particularly great

during restricted intervals in early postnatal life

- called critical periods. Alterations that occur during these periods are nearly irreversible. 2. Critical periods vary in time among brain areas and tasks. For example, children with strabismus (crossed eyes) will never have good stereoscopic
- vision unless their eyes are brought into alignment during the first few postnatal years, and people cannot learn a new language without an accent after their early teens. 3. The richest understanding of critical periods comes from studies initiated by Hubel and Wiesel on how input from the two eyes is integrated
- in the cortex. They deprived one eye of vision for varying periods in young cats or monkeys. In normal animals, most neurons in visual cortex are binocularly responsive, but following monocular deprivation for a brief period in early postnatal life, most cortical cells permanently lost responsiveness to input from the once-closed eye. Responses in the eye itself and the lateral geniculate nucleus were nearly normal, pinpointing the cortex as the site of change. Much longer deprivation in adulthood had little effect. 4. A structural basis for the loss of binocularity was seen in the alternating pattern of ocular dominance columns, within which neurons are
- dominated by input from one eye or the other. Following monocular deprivation during the critical period, columns representing the open eye expanded at the expense of those representing the closed eye. This form of plasticity may be designed to optimize the use of cortical space for each individual at each time period—for example, subtly shifting binocular interactions as the head grows and the eyes become further apart. 5. The binocular interaction reflects competition between the two sets of inputs, since vision and symmetrical columns are retained following bin-
- ocular deprivation. Many lines of evidence indicate that the competition depends on patterns of activity arising in the two eyes, with inputs from each eye being more synchronous with each other than with

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1233

driven by visual experience. Prenatally or prior to

eye opening, patterned spontaneous activity in the

- two eyes accounts for the synchrony. 6. Cellular mechanisms underlying the effects of monocular deprivation have been studied in greatest detail in mice. Following monocular
- deprivation, input from the closed eye is weakened rapidly by a process akin to long-term depression (LTD). Shortly thereafter, input from the other eye is strengthened, partly by a compensatory mechanism called homeostatic plasticity. Structural remodeling of thalamic axons and cortical dendrites occurs later. 7. Maturation of inhibitory interneurons is a main determinant of when the critical period opens. The end of the critical period is marked by the
- formation of myelin and proteoglycan-rich perineuronal structures that hamper structural remodeling. 8. Although plasticity of binocular interactions was initially believed to be confined to early postnatal life, it is now apparent that critical periods can
- be "reopened" to some extent in adults. In some cases, this can be done by altering the animal's environment or the way in which the altered experience is delivered. Critical periods can also be reopened by manipulating some of the factors that normally close them in adolescence. 9. Plasticity in adulthood is modest in magnitude and difficult to trigger compared to early postnatal critical periods. Nonetheless, reopening of
- critical periods could, if properly controlled, enable reorganization to compensate for losses incurred from injuries, disease, and early maladaptive experience. 10. Critical periods occur during development of numerous systems, such as formation of orderly maps of auditory, somatosensory, and visual
- input onto relevant sensory cortices. Many of the principles and mechanisms that characterize the plasticity of binocular interactions also regulate these critical periods, including roles of spontaneous and experience-dependent activity, competition, alterations in excitatory and inhibitory synapses, and selective growth and pruning of inputs to achieve appropriate patterns of adult connectivity. 11. The existence of critical periods demonstrates that the brain's ability to remodel declines precipitously in adulthood. This seems disadvan-
- tageous but may represent a useful adaptation, allowing each brain to adapt to its environment

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

as it develops, but then buffering it against exces-

sive change later, perhaps even enabling skills

and memories to persist. If this is the case, thera-

pies based on reopening critical periods in adults may come at a cost.

Constantine-Paton M, Law MI. 1978. Eye-specific termination

bands in tecta of three-eyed frogs. Science 202:639–641.

Davis MF, Figueroa Velez DX, et al. 2015. Inhibitory neu-

- ron transplantation into adult visual cortex creates a new critical period that rescues impaired vision. Neuron
- 86:1055–1066. Eluvathingal TJ, Chugani HT, Behen ME, et al. 2006. Abnormal brain connectivity in children after early severe socioemotional deprivation: a diffusion tensor imaging
- Joshua R. Sanes study. Pediatrics 117:2093–2100. Galli L, Maffei L. 1988. Spontaneous impulse activity of rat retinal ganglion cells in prenatal life. Science 242: 90–91.
- Hebb DO. 1949. Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. New York: Wiley. Hensch TK. 2005. Critical period plasticity in local cortical
- circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:877–888. Hensch TK, Fagiolini M, Mataga N, Stryker MP, Baekkeskov
- S, Kash SF. 1998. Local GABA circuit control of experiencedependent plasticity in developing visual cortex. Science
- 282:1504–1508. Hofer S, Mrsic-Flogel T, Bonhoeffer T, Hubener M. 2009. Experience leaves a lasting structural trace in cortical circuits. Nature 457:313–317.
- Hong YK, Park S, Litvina EY, Morales J, Sanes JR, Chen C. 2014. Refinement of the retinogeniculate synapse by bouton clustering. Neuron 84:332–339.
- Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1965. Binocular interaction in striate cortex of kittens reared with artificial squint. J Neurophysiol 28:1041–1059.
- Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1977. Ferrier lecture: functional architecture of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 198:1–59.
- Hubel DH, Wiesel TN, LeVay S. 1977. Plasticity of ocular dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 278:377–409.
- Khibnik LA, Cho KK, Bear MF. 2010. Relative contribution of feed forward excitatory connections to expression of ocular dominance plasticity in layer 4 of visual cortex.
- Neuron 66:493–500. Kral A, Sharma A. 2012. Developmental neuroplasticity after cochlear implantation. Trends Neurosci 35:111–122. Linkenhoker BA, Knudsen EI. 2002 Incremental training
- increases the plasticity of the auditory space map in adult barn owls. Nature 419:293–296.
- Löwel S. 1994. Ocular dominance column development: strabismus changes the spacing of adjacent columns in cat visual cortex. J Neurosci 14:7451–7468.
- McGee AW, Yang Y, Fischer QS, Daw NW, Strittmatter SM. 2005. Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin and Nogo receptor. Science 309:2222–2226.
- Meister M, Wong ROL, Baylor DA, Shatz CJ. 1991. Synchronous bursts of action potentials in ganglion cells of the developing mammalian retina. Science 252:939–943.
- Merzenich MM, Nelson RJ, Stryker MP, Cynader MS, Schoppmann A, Zook JM. 1984. Somatosensory cortical map changes following digit amputation in adult mon-
- keys. J Comp Neurol 224:591–605.

Selected Reading

Espinosa JS, Stryker MP. 2012. Development and plasticity of

the primary visual cortex. Neuron 75:230–249.

Harlow HF. 1958. The nature of love. Am Psychol 13:

- 673–685. Hensch TK, Quinlan EM. 2018. Critical periods in amblyopia.
- Vis Neurosci 35:E014. Hübener M, Bonhoeffer T. 2014. Neuronal plasticity: beyond
- the critical period. Cell 159:727–737. Knudsen EI. 2002. Instructed learning in the auditory locali-
- zation pathway of the barn owl. Nature 417:322–328. Leighton AH, Lohmann C. 2016. The wiring of developing
- sensory circuits: from patterned spontaneous activity to synaptic plasticity mechanisms. Front Neural Circuits
- 10:71. Thompson A, Gribizis A, Chen C, Crair MC. 2017. Activitydependent development of visual receptive fields. Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:136–143.
- Wiesel TN. 1982. Postnatal development of the visual cortex and the influence of environment. Nature 299:583–591.
- References

Allard T, Clark SA, Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM. 1991. Reor-

ganization of somatosensory area 3b representations in

adult owl monkeys after digital syndactyly. J Neurophysiol

- 66:1048–1058. Antonini A, Stryker MP. 1993. Rapid remodeling of axonal arbors in the visual cortex. Science 260:1819–1812. Behen ME, Helder E, Rothermel R, Solomon K, Chugani
- HT. 2008. Incidence of specific absolute neurocognitive impairment in globally intact children with histo-
- ries of early severe deprivation. Child Neuropsychol 14: 453–469. Bergan JF, Ro P, Ro D, Knudsen EI. 2005. Hunting increases adaptive auditory map plasticity in adult barn owls. J Neurosci 25:9816–9820.
- Blankenship A, Ford K, Johnson J, et al. 2009. Synaptic and extrasynaptic factors governing glutamatergic retinal waves. Neuron 62:230–241.
- Buonomano DV, Merzenich MM. 1998. Cortical plasticity: from synapses to maps. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:149–186.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1234

18/01/21 6:34 PM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

as it develops, but then buffering it against exces-

sive change later, perhaps even enabling skills

and memories to persist. If this is the case, thera-

pies based on reopening critical periods in adults may come at a cost.

Constantine-Paton M, Law MI. 1978. Eye-specific termination

bands in tecta of three-eyed frogs. Science 202:639–641.

Davis MF, Figueroa Velez DX, et al. 2015. Inhibitory neu-

- ron transplantation into adult visual cortex creates a new critical period that rescues impaired vision. Neuron
- 86:1055–1066. Eluvathingal TJ, Chugani HT, Behen ME, et al. 2006. Abnormal brain connectivity in children after early severe socioemotional deprivation: a diffusion tensor imaging
- Joshua R. Sanes study. Pediatrics 117:2093–2100. Galli L, Maffei L. 1988. Spontaneous impulse activity of rat retinal ganglion cells in prenatal life. Science 242: 90–91.
- Hebb DO. 1949. Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. New York: Wiley. Hensch TK. 2005. Critical period plasticity in local cortical
- circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:877–888. Hensch TK, Fagiolini M, Mataga N, Stryker MP, Baekkeskov
- S, Kash SF. 1998. Local GABA circuit control of experiencedependent plasticity in developing visual cortex. Science
- 282:1504–1508. Hofer S, Mrsic-Flogel T, Bonhoeffer T, Hubener M. 2009. Experience leaves a lasting structural trace in cortical circuits. Nature 457:313–317.
- Hong YK, Park S, Litvina EY, Morales J, Sanes JR, Chen C. 2014. Refinement of the retinogeniculate synapse by bouton clustering. Neuron 84:332–339.
- Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1965. Binocular interaction in striate cortex of kittens reared with artificial squint. J Neurophysiol 28:1041–1059.
- Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1977. Ferrier lecture: functional architecture of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 198:1–59.
- Hubel DH, Wiesel TN, LeVay S. 1977. Plasticity of ocular dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 278:377–409.
- Khibnik LA, Cho KK, Bear MF. 2010. Relative contribution of feed forward excitatory connections to expression of ocular dominance plasticity in layer 4 of visual cortex.
- Neuron 66:493–500. Kral A, Sharma A. 2012. Developmental neuroplasticity after cochlear implantation. Trends Neurosci 35:111–122. Linkenhoker BA, Knudsen EI. 2002 Incremental training
- increases the plasticity of the auditory space map in adult barn owls. Nature 419:293–296.
- Löwel S. 1994. Ocular dominance column development: strabismus changes the spacing of adjacent columns in cat visual cortex. J Neurosci 14:7451–7468.
- McGee AW, Yang Y, Fischer QS, Daw NW, Strittmatter SM. 2005. Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin and Nogo receptor. Science 309:2222–2226.
- Meister M, Wong ROL, Baylor DA, Shatz CJ. 1991. Synchronous bursts of action potentials in ganglion cells of the developing mammalian retina. Science 252:939–943.
- Merzenich MM, Nelson RJ, Stryker MP, Cynader MS, Schoppmann A, Zook JM. 1984. Somatosensory cortical map changes following digit amputation in adult mon-
- keys. J Comp Neurol 224:591–605.

Selected Reading

Espinosa JS, Stryker MP. 2012. Development and plasticity of

the primary visual cortex. Neuron 75:230–249.

Harlow HF. 1958. The nature of love. Am Psychol 13:

- 673–685. Hensch TK, Quinlan EM. 2018. Critical periods in amblyopia.
- Vis Neurosci 35:E014. Hübener M, Bonhoeffer T. 2014. Neuronal plasticity: beyond
- the critical period. Cell 159:727–737. Knudsen EI. 2002. Instructed learning in the auditory locali-
- zation pathway of the barn owl. Nature 417:322–328. Leighton AH, Lohmann C. 2016. The wiring of developing
- sensory circuits: from patterned spontaneous activity to synaptic plasticity mechanisms. Front Neural Circuits
- 10:71. Thompson A, Gribizis A, Chen C, Crair MC. 2017. Activitydependent development of visual receptive fields. Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:136–143.
- Wiesel TN. 1982. Postnatal development of the visual cortex and the influence of environment. Nature 299:583–591.
- References

Allard T, Clark SA, Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM. 1991. Reor-

ganization of somatosensory area 3b representations in

adult owl monkeys after digital syndactyly. J Neurophysiol

- 66:1048–1058. Antonini A, Stryker MP. 1993. Rapid remodeling of axonal arbors in the visual cortex. Science 260:1819–1812. Behen ME, Helder E, Rothermel R, Solomon K, Chugani
- HT. 2008. Incidence of specific absolute neurocognitive impairment in globally intact children with histo-
- ries of early severe deprivation. Child Neuropsychol 14: 453–469. Bergan JF, Ro P, Ro D, Knudsen EI. 2005. Hunting increases adaptive auditory map plasticity in adult barn owls. J Neurosci 25:9816–9820.
- Blankenship A, Ford K, Johnson J, et al. 2009. Synaptic and extrasynaptic factors governing glutamatergic retinal waves. Neuron 62:230–241.
- Buonomano DV, Merzenich MM. 1998. Cortical plasticity: from synapses to maps. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:149–186.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1234

18/01/21 6:34 PM

Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections

Nelson CA 3rd, Zeanah CH, Fox NA, Marshall PJ, Smyke AT,


Sanes JR, Yamagata M. 1999. Formation of lamina-specific

Guthrie D. 2007. Cognitive recovery in socially deprived

young children: the Bucharest Early Intervention Project.

- Science 318:1937–1940. Oray S, Majewska A, Sur M. 2004. Dendritic spine dynamics are regulated by monocular deprivation and extracellular matrix degradation. Neuron 44:1021–1030.
- Pizzorusso T, Medini P, Berardi N, Chierzi S, Fawcett JW, Maffei L. 2002. Reactivation of ocular dominance plasticity in the adult visual cortex. Science 298:1248–1251.
- Rakic P. 1981. Development of visual centers in the primate brain depends on binocular competition before birth. Science 214:928–931.

Kandel-Ch49\_1210-1235.indd 1235

synaptic connections. Curr Opin Neurobiol 9:79–87.

Shatz CJ, Stryker MP. 1988. Prenatal tetrodotoxin infusion

- blocks segregation of retino-geniculate afferents. Science 242:87–89.
- Van Sluyters RC, Levitt FB. 1980. Experimental strabismus in the kitten. J Neurophysiol 43:686–699. Zhang J, Ackman JB, Xu HP, Crair MC. 2011. Visual map
- development depends on the temporal pattern of binocular activity in mice. Nat Neurosci 15:298–307.

18/01/21 6:34 PM


Repairing the Damaged Brain

Damage to the Axon Affects Both the Neuron and

Neighboring Cells

Axon Degeneration Is an Active Process

## Axotomy Leads to Reactive Responses in Nearby Cells

Central Axons Regenerate Poorly After Injury

Therapeutic Interventions May Promote Regeneration of Injured Central Neurons

## Environmental Factors Support the Regeneration of

## Injured Axons Components of Myelin Inhibit Neurite Outgrowth

Injury-Induced Scarring Hinders Axonal Regeneration

An Intrinsic Growth Program Promotes Regeneration Formation of New Connections by Intact Axons Can Lead to Recovery of Function Following Injury Neurons in the Injured Brain Die but New Ones Can Be Born Therapeutic Interventions May Retain or Replace Injured Central Neurons

## Transplantation of Neurons or Their Progenitors Can Replace Lost Neurons Stimulation of Neurogenesis in Regions of Injury May

Contribute to Restoring Function Transplantation of Nonneuronal Cells or Their

Progenitors Can Improve Neuronal Function Restoration of Function Is the Aim of

Regenerative Therapies Highlights

F

or much of its history, neurology has been a

discipline of outstanding diagnostic rigor but lit-

tle therapeutic efficacy. Simply put, neurologists

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1236

have been renowned for their ability to localize lesions

with great precision but until recently have had little

to offer in terms of treatment. This situation is now

changing. Advances in our understanding of the structure, function, and chemistry of the brain's neurons, glial cells, and synapses have led to new ideas for treat-

ment. Many of these are now in clinical trials, and some are already available to patients. Developmental neuroscience is emerging as a major contributor to this sea change for three main reasons. First, efforts to preserve or replace neurons lost to damage or disease rely on recent advances in our understanding of the mechanisms that control the generation and death of nerve cells in embryos (Chapters 45 and 46). Second, efforts to improve the regeneration of neural pathways following injury draw heavily on what we have learned about the growth of axons and the formation of synapses (Chapters 47 and 48). Third, there is increasing evidence that some devastating brain disorders, such as autism and schizophrenia, are the result of disturbances in the formation of neural circuits in embryonic or early postnatal life. Accordingly, studies of normal development provide an essential foundation for discovering precisely what has gone wrong in disease. In this chapter, we focus on the first two of these issues: how neuroscientists hope to augment the limited ability of neurons to recover normal function. We

shall begin by describing how axons degenerate following the separation of the axon and its terminals from the cell body. The regeneration of severed axons is robust in the peripheral nervous system of mammals and in the central nervous system of lower vertebrates, but very poor in the central nervous system of

12/01/21 9:10 AM

mammals. Many investigators have sought the reasons

for these differences in the hope that understanding

them will lead to methods for augmenting recovery

of the human brain and spinal cord following injury. Indeed, we shall see that several differences in regenerative capacity of mammalian neurons have been discovered, each of which has opened promising new approaches to therapy. We shall then consider an even more dire conse quence of neural injury: the death of neurons. The inability of the adult brain to form new neurons has been Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain Damage to the Axon Affects Both the Neuron and Neighboring Cells

## Because many neurons have very long axons and cell bodies of modest size, most injuries to the cen-

tral or peripheral nervous system involve damage to

-axons. Transection of the axon, either by cutting or by crushing, is called axotomy, and its consequences are numerous. Axon Degeneration Is an Active Process

Axotomy divides the axon in two: a proximal segment

## that remains attached to the cell body and a distal seg-

ment that has lost this crucial attachment. Axotomy

dooms the distal segment of the axon because energy supplies dwindle during a short-lived latent period. Soon the alterations become irreversible. Synaptic transmission fails at severed nerve terminals, and calcium levels increase within the axon. The calcium activates proteases, initiating a program of cytoskeletal disassembly and degradation, and physical degeneration of the axon ensues. Once the denervation begins, its progression is relatively rapid and inexorably proceeds to completion (Figure 50–1). This degenerative response is the first step in an elaborate constellation

Oligodendrocyte

or Schwann cell

a central dogma of neuroscience since the pioneering neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal asserted that in the injured central nervous system, "Everything may die, nothing may be regenerated." This pessimistic view dominated neurology for most of the last century despite the fact that Ramón y Cajal added, "It is for the science of the future to change, if possible, this harsh decree." Remarkably, in the past few decades, evidence has accumulated that neurogenesis does occur in certain regions of the adult mammalian brain. This discovery has helped accelerate the pace of research on ways to stimulate neurogenesis and to replace neurons following injury. More than a century later, neuroscientists are finally beginning to reverse Cajal's "harsh decree."

A

Nissl substance

Glial

cell

A. A normal neuron with an intact functional axon wrapped by

myelinating cells contacts a postsynaptic neuron. The neuron's cell body is itself a postsynaptic target.

<!-- image -->

B. After axotomy, the nerve terminals of the injured neuron begin to degenerate (1). The distal axonal stump separates from the parental cell body, becomes irregular, and undergoes

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1237

Transneuronal

degeneration

(anterograde)


of the damaged neuron undergoes chromatolysis: The cell

body swells and the nucleus moves to an eccentric position (5). Synaptic terminals that contact the damaged neuron withdraw and the synaptic site is invaded by glial cell processes (6). The injured neuron's inputs (7) and targets (8) can atrophy and degenerate.

12/01/21 9:10 AM

Myelin



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

of changes, called Wallerian degeneration, that were ini-

tially described in 1850 by Augustus Waller.

The degeneration of transected axons was long

thought to be a passive process, the consequence of separation from the cell body, where most of the cell's

proteins are synthesized. Lacking a source of new protein, the distal stump was thought to simply wither away. But the discovery and analysis in mice of a spontaneously occurring mutation called Wlds (Wallerian degeneration slow) challenged this view (Figure 50–2). In Wlds mutant mice, the distal stumps of peripheral nerves persist for several weeks after transection, about 10-fold longer than in normal mice. This remarkable finding suggested that degeneration is not a passive consequence of separation from the cell body, but is rather an actively regulated response. Analysis of the Wlds mutant mice led to insights into the nature of this regulation. The mutation led to formation of a mutant form of nicotinamide mononu

-

cleotide adenyltransferase 1 (NMNAT1), an enzyme

involved in biosynthesis of a metabolic cofactor, nicoti-

namide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). A related enzyme, NMNAT2, which is normally present in the axon, becomes quite unstable and breaks down rapidly following axotomy, leading to loss of NAD, which is critical for maintenance of energy homeostasis in the axon. Although normal NMNAT1 is confined to the nucleus, the mutant Wlds form mislocalizes to the axon, where it substitutes for NMNAT2 to prolong axonal survival. Surprisingly, a main way that both the wild type and Wlds forms of NMNAT maintain NAD levels is not by synthesizing it but by inhibiting another protein, SARM1, that breaks down NAD. Thus, loss of SARM protects damaged axons, whereas activation of SARM1 leads to degeneration (Figure 50–3A). Several other proteins modulate this core pathway (Figure 50–3B).

Figure 50–2 Axonal degeneration is delayed in Wlds

mutant mice. In wild type animals, axons in the distal

stump degenerate rapidly after sectioning of a peripheral

nerve, as shown by disrupted axonal fragments (yellow) and the lack of myelinated axonal profiles at the electron micrographic level. In Wlds mutant mice the distal portion of severed axons persists for a long time. (Confocal micrographs reproduced, with permission, from Beirowski et al. 2004. Copyright © 2004 Elsevier B.V.; electron micrographs reproduced, with permission, from Mack TGA, Reiner M, Beirowski B, et al. 2001. Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1238

<!-- image -->

12/01/21 9:11 AM

A

Uninjured Wild type Wild type SARM1 KO

<!-- image -->

A. Damage to neurites in vitro leads to degeneration of the por-

tions separated from the cell body. Likewise, axotomy in vivo leads to Wallerian degeneration, as shown by loss of myelin

profiles in the cross section. Both in vitro and in vivo axons are spared if the SARM1 gene is deleted. (From Gerdts et al. 2013.) B. NMNAT2, closely related to the mutant Wlds protein, is normally present in axons. It can generate nicotinamide

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1239

NAM

energy metabolism, keeping adenosine triphosphate (ATP)

levels high and calcium levels low in the axon. Following axotomy, NMNAT2 levels decrease rapidly, disinhibiting SARM1. NAD levels fall, ATP is depleted, calcium levels rise, calcium-dependent proteases are activated, and the axon is degraded. Kinases (MAPK) and a ubiquitin ligase (Phr1) regulate the pathway.

12/01/21 9:11 AM

Injured


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Together, these exciting new discoveries provide

an answer to the question of why, following axotomy,

the distal stump degenerates while the proximal

stump is preserved. The conventional explanation that the distal stump is deprived of nutrients normally delivered from the cell body is incomplete. Instead, a signaling pathway in the axon senses damage and rapidly triggers degeneration. In this scenario, the key element supplied by the axon is NMNAT2. Its breakdown following axotomy disinhibits SARM1 and, perhaps in parallel with activation of factors that stimulate SARM1, triggers the loss of NAD, leading to the energy crisis that results in Wallerian degeneration. These recent discoveries may be useful in devising treatments for neurological disorders in which axonal degeneration is prominent and generally precedes

neuronal death. A fatal disease of motor neurons, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, falls into this category. Other possibilities include some forms of spinal muscular atrophy, Parkinson disease, and even Alzheimer disease. Axon degeneration that occurs in these diseases, as well as after metabolic, toxic, or inflammatory insults, resembles the degeneration that follows acute trauma and may be regulated in similar ways. Thus, while methods for saving transected distal axons are unlikely to be useful clinically for treating patients who have suffered traumatic injury, the same techniques could be useful in treating neurodegenerative diseases. Even though the proximal portion of the axon remains attached to the cell body, it too suffers. And in some cases, the neuron itself dies by apoptosis, prob-

ably because axotomy isolates the cell body from its supply of target-derived trophic factors. Even when this does not occur, the cell body often undergoes a series of cellular and biochemical changes called the chromatolytic reaction: The cell body swells, the nucleus moves to an eccentric position, and the rough endoplasmic reticulum becomes fragmented (Figure 50–1B). Chromatolysis is accompanied by other metabolic changes, including an increase in protein and RNA synthesis as well as a change in the pattern of genes that the neuron expresses. These changes are reversed if regeneration is successful. Axotomy Leads to Reactive Responses in Nearby Cells

## Axotomy sets in motion a cascade of responses in numerous types of neighboring cells. Among the most

important responses are those of the glial cells that

ensheath the distal nerve segment. One is fragmentation

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1240

of the myelin sheath, which is then removed by phago-

cytes. This process is rapid in the peripheral nervous

system, where the myelin-producing Schwann cells

break the myelin into small fragments and engulf it. Schwann cells, which then divide, secrete factors that recruit macrophages from the blood stream. The macrophages in turn assist the Schwann cells in disposing of debris. Schwann cells also produce growth factors that promote axon regeneration, a point to which we will return later. In contrast, in the central nervous system, the myelin-forming oligodendrocytes have little or no ability to dispose of myelin, and removal of debris

depends on resident phagocytic cells called microglia . This difference in cellular properties may help explain the observation that Wallerian degeneration proceeds to completion much more slowly in the central nervous system. Axotomy also affects both the synaptic inputs to and the synaptic targets of the injured neuron. When axotomy disrupts the major inputs to a cell—as hap-

pens in denervated muscle, or to neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus when the optic nerve is cut—the consequences are severe. Usually the target atrophies and sometimes dies. When targets are only partially denervated, their responses are more limited. In addition, axotomy affects presynaptic neurons. In many instances, synaptic terminals withdraw from the cell body or dendrites of chromatolytic neurons and are replaced by the processes of glial cells—Schwann cells in the periphery and microglia or astrocytes in the central nervous system. This process, called synaptic stripping, depresses synaptic activity and can impair functional recovery. Although the mechanism of synaptic stripping remains unclear, two possibilities have been suggested. One is that postsynaptic injury causes axon

terminals to lose their adhesiveness to synaptic sites so that they are subsequently wrapped by glia. The other is that glia initiate the process of synaptic stripping in response to factors released from the injured neuron or to changes in its cell surface. Whatever the trigger, the activation of microglia and astrocytes by axotomy clearly contributes to the stripping process. In addition, biochemically altered astrocytes, called reactive astrocytes, contribute to formation of a glial scar near sites of injury. As a result of these transsynaptic effects, neuronal degeneration can propagate through a circuit in both anterograde and retrograde directions. For

example, a denervated neuron that becomes severely atrophic can fail to activate its target, which in turn becomes atrophic. Likewise, when synaptic stripping

12/01/21 9:11 AM

prevents an afferent neuron from obtaining sufficient

sustenance from its target cell, the afferent neuron's

inputs are placed at risk. Such chain reactions help to

explain how injury in one area in the central nervous system eventually affects regions far from the site of the injury. Central Axons Regenerate Poorly After Injury

Central and peripheral nerves differ substantially in

## their ability to regenerate after injury. Peripheral nerves

can often be repaired following injury. Although the

distal segments of peripheral axons degenerate, connective tissue elements surrounding the distal stump generally survive. Axonal sprouts grow from the proximal stump, enter the distal stump, and grow along the nerve toward its targets (Figure 50–4). The mechanisms that drive

this process are related to those that guide embryonic axons. Chemotropic factors secreted by Schwann cells attract axons to the distal stump, adhesive molecules

Peripheral nervous system

Myelin Schwann cell Perineural sheath

<!-- image -->

those in the central nervous system. After sectioning of a

peripheral nerve, the perineural sheath reforms rapidly and Oligodendrocyte

Schwann cells in the distal stump promote axonal growth by producing trophic and attractant factors and expressing high

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1241

Glial

scar

myelin fragments. In addition, reactive astrocytes and mac-

rophages are attracted to the lesion site. This complex cellular milieu, termed a glial scar, inhibits axonal regeneration.

12/01/21 9:11 AM

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain


within the distal stump promote axon growth along

cell membranes and extracellular matrices, and inhibi-

tory molecules in the perineural sheath prevent regen-

erating axons from going astray. Once regenerated peripheral axons reach their targets, they are able to form new functional nerve endings. Motor axons form new neuromuscular junctions;

autonomic axons successfully reinnervate glands, blood vessels, and viscera; and sensory axons reinnervate muscle spindles. Finally, those axons that lost their myelin sheaths are remyelinated, and chromatolytic cell bodies regain their original appearance. Thus, in all three divisions of the peripheral nervous system— motor, sensory, and autonomic—the effects of axotomy are reversible. Peripheral regeneration is not perfect, however. In the motor system, recovery of strength may be substantial, but recovery of fine movements is usually impaired. Some motor axons never find their targets, some form synapses on inappropriate muscles, and some motor neurons die. Nevertheless, the regenerative capacities in the peripheral nervous system are impressive.

Central nervous system


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

In contrast, regeneration after injury is poor in

the central nervous system (Figure 50–4). The proxi-

mal stumps of damaged axons can form short sprouts,

but these soon stall and form swollen endings called "retraction bulbs", which fail to progress. Long-distance regeneration is rare. The failure of central regeneration is what led to the long-standing belief that injuries to the brain and spinal cord are largely irreversible and that therapy must be restricted to rehabilitative measures. For some time, neurobiologists have been seeking the reasons why regenerative capacity in the central and peripheral nervous systems differs so dramati-

cally. The goal of this work has been to identify the crucial barriers to regeneration so that they can be overcome. These studies have begun to bear fruit, and there is now cautious optimism that the injured human brain and spinal cord have a regenerative capacity that can eventually be exploited. Before discussing these new developments, it is helpful to consider the problem of neural regeneration in a broader biological context. Is it the ability of

peripheral axons to regenerate that is unusual, or the inability of central axons to do so? It is in fact the latter. Obviously, central axons grow well during development. More surprisingly, axons in immature mammals can also regenerate following transection in the brain or spinal cord. Moreover, regeneration is robust in the adult central nervous systems of lower vertebrates such as fish and frogs, as exemplified by the studies of Roger Sperry on restoration of vision following damage to the optic nerve (Chapter 47). So why have mature mammals lost this seemingly important capacity for repair? The answer may lie in what the mammalian brain can do peerlessly, which Therapeutic Interventions May Promote Regeneration of Injured Central Neurons

## In seeking reasons for the poor regeneration of central axons, one critical question is whether it reflects an ina-

bility of neurons themselves to grow or an inability of

the environment to support axonal growth. This issue was addressed by Albert Aguayo and his colleagues in the early 1980s. They inserted segments of a central nerve trunk into a peripheral nerve, and segments of a peripheral nerve into the brain or spinal cord, to find out how axons would respond when confronted with a novel environment. As expected, axons in the grafts, which were separated from their somata, promptly degenerated, leaving "distal stumps" containing glia, support cells, and

extracellular matrix. What was striking was the behavior of axons near the translocated segments. Spinal axons that regenerated poorly following spinal cord injury grew several centimeters into the peripheral graft (Figure 50–5). Similarly, retinal axons, which regenerated poorly following damage to the optic nerve, grew long distances into a peripheral graft placed in their path.

<!-- image -->

.

axons Left: After sectioning of the spinal cord, ascending and

descending axons fail to cross the lesion site. Right: Insertion of a peripheral nerve graft that bypasses the lesion site promotes regeneration of both ascending and descending axons. (Adapted from David and Aguayo 1981.)

is to remodel its basic wiring diagram in accordance with experience during critical periods in early postnatal life, so that each individual's brain is optimized to deal with the changes and challenges of internal and external worlds (Chapter 49). Once remodeling has occurred, it must be stabilized. Although it is obviously useful to reassign cortical space to one eye if the other is blinded in childhood, we would not want our cortical connections similarly rearranged in response to a brief period of unusual illumination or darkness. Maintaining constancy in the face of small perturbations in connectivity may therefore have the unavoidable consequence of limiting the ability of central connections to regenerate in response to injury. In this view, our limited regenerative capacity is a Faustian bargain in which we have sacrificed recuperative power to ensure the maintenance of precisely wired circuits that underlie our superior intellectual capacity.

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1242

12/01/21 9:11 AM

A Peripheral nervous system

(motor and sensory nerve)

Spinal cord Muscle

ability to support axonal regeneration.

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain

B Central nervous system

(optic nerve)

Retina Tectum

B. In the central nervous system, severed axons typically

fail to regrow past the site of injury. Insertion of a sec-

tion of peripheral nerve into a central nerve tract promotes

<!-- image -->

A. In the peripheral nervous system, severed axons regrow

past the site of injury. Insertion of a segment of optic nerve into a peripheral nerve suppresses the ability of the peripheral

nerve to regenerate. Conversely, peripheral axons regenerated well through their own distal nerve trunk, but fared poorly when

paired with a severed optic nerve (Figure 50–6).

Aguayo extended these studies to show that axons from multiple regions, including the olfactory bulb, brain stem, and mesencephalon, could all regenerate

long distances if provided with a suitable environment. Even an optimal environment cannot fully restore the growth potential of central axons for reasons we will discuss in a later section. Nevertheless, these pioneering experiments focused attention on components of the central environment that inhibit regenerative ability and motivated an intensive search for the molecular culprits. Environmental Factors Support the Regeneration of Injured Axons

## In probing the differences between peripheral and central growth environments, initial searches were

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1243

regeneration.

influenced by the results of experiments performed

by Ramón y Cajal's student Francisco Tello nearly a

century before Aguayo's studies. Tello transplanted

segments of peripheral nerves into the brains of experimental animals and found that injured central axons grew toward the implants, whereas they barely grew when implants were not available. This result implied that peripheral cells provide growth-promoting factors to the injured areas, factors normally absent from the brain. Ramón y Cajal rea-

soned that central nerve pathways lacked "substances able to sustain and invigorate the indolent and scanty growth" similar to those provided by peripheral pathways. Numerous studies over the succeeding century identified constituents of peripheral nerves that are potent promoters of neurite outgrowth. These include components of Schwann cell basal laminae, such as laminin, and cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily. In addition, cells in denervated

12/01/21 9:11 AM
A Peripheral nervous system

(motor and sensory nerve)

Spinal cord Muscle

ability to support axonal regeneration.

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain

B Central nervous system

(optic nerve)

Retina Tectum

B. In the central nervous system, severed axons typically

fail to regrow past the site of injury. Insertion of a sec-

tion of peripheral nerve into a central nerve tract promotes

<!-- image -->

A. In the peripheral nervous system, severed axons regrow

past the site of injury. Insertion of a segment of optic nerve into a peripheral nerve suppresses the ability of the peripheral

nerve to regenerate. Conversely, peripheral axons regenerated well through their own distal nerve trunk, but fared poorly when

paired with a severed optic nerve (Figure 50–6).

Aguayo extended these studies to show that axons from multiple regions, including the olfactory bulb, brain stem, and mesencephalon, could all regenerate

long distances if provided with a suitable environment. Even an optimal environment cannot fully restore the growth potential of central axons for reasons we will discuss in a later section. Nevertheless, these pioneering experiments focused attention on components of the central environment that inhibit regenerative ability and motivated an intensive search for the molecular culprits. Environmental Factors Support the Regeneration of Injured Axons

## In probing the differences between peripheral and central growth environments, initial searches were

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1243

regeneration.

influenced by the results of experiments performed

by Ramón y Cajal's student Francisco Tello nearly a

century before Aguayo's studies. Tello transplanted

segments of peripheral nerves into the brains of experimental animals and found that injured central axons grew toward the implants, whereas they barely grew when implants were not available. This result implied that peripheral cells provide growth-promoting factors to the injured areas, factors normally absent from the brain. Ramón y Cajal rea-

soned that central nerve pathways lacked "substances able to sustain and invigorate the indolent and scanty growth" similar to those provided by peripheral pathways. Numerous studies over the succeeding century identified constituents of peripheral nerves that are potent promoters of neurite outgrowth. These include components of Schwann cell basal laminae, such as laminin, and cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily. In addition, cells in denervated

12/01/21 9:11 AM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

distal nerve stumps begin to produce neurotrophins

and other trophic molecules of the sort described in

Chapter 46. Together, these molecules nourish neurons

and guide growing axons in the embryonic nervous system, so it makes sense that they also promote the regrowth of axons. By contrast, central neuronal tissue is a poor source of these molecules, containing little laminin and low levels of trophic molecules. Thus, in the embryo, both central and peripheral nervous systems provide environments that promote axon outgrowth. But only the peripheral environment retains this capacity in adulthood or is able to regain it effectively following injury. The practical implications of this view are that supplementing the central environment with growthpromoting molecules might improve regeneration. To Components of Myelin Inhibit Neurite Outgrowth What accounts for such disappointingly limited regen-

## eration? One part of the explanation is that the envi-

ronment encountered by severed central axons is not

only poor in growth-promoting factors but also rich in growth-inhibiting factors, some of which are derived from myelin. In culture, fragments of central but not peripheral myelin potently inhibit neurite outgrowth from co-cultured central or peripheral neurons. Conversely, sprouting of spinal axon collaterals following injury is enhanced in rats treated to prevent myelin formation in the spinal cord (Figure 50–7). These findings implied that although both central and peripheral environments might contain a supply of growth-promoting elements, central nerves also

-contain inhibitory components. The fact that myelin inhibits neurite growth may seem peculiar, but not if we consider that myelination normally occurs postnatally, after axon extension is largely complete. Searches for the inhibitory components of central myelin turned up an embarrassment of riches. Several classes of molecules that occur at higher levels in cen-

tral myelin compared to peripheral myelin are able to inhibit neurite outgrowth when presented to cultured neurons. The first to be discovered was identified when an antibody generated against myelin proteins proved B Limited regeneration C Regeneration in

this end, investigators have infused neurotrophins into areas of injury or inserted fibers rich in extracellular matrix molecules such as laminin to serve as scaf fold for axonal growth. In some attempts, Schwann cells themselves, or cells engineered to secrete trophic factors, have been grafted into sites of injury. In many of these cases, injured axons grow more extensively than they do under control conditions. Yet regeneration remains limited, with axons generally failing to extend long distances. More important, functional recovery is minimal. A Normal

in myelin-rich cord myelin-free cord

20 days later. The central branches of the sectioned axons

degenerated, leaving a portion of the spinal cord denervated.

Little regeneration occurred in the myelin-rich cord.

<!-- image -->

and Kapfhammer 1995.)

A. Sensory fibers normally extend rostrally in a myelin-rich spinal cord. B. Right dorsal root fibers were sectioned in 2-week-old normal

rats. Regeneration of the fibers was assessed histochemically

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1244

- C. Some littermates received local x-irradiation to block myelination. In these animals, sensory fibers that entered the cord through neighboring uninjured roots sprouted new collaterals
2. following denervation.

12/01/21 9:11 AM

to be capable of partially neutralizing myelin's ability

to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Use of this antibody to

isolate the corresponding antigen yielded the protein Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain


inhibition, all interact with the neurotrophin receptor

p75 (Chapter 46). This interaction converts p75 from

a growth-promoting to a growth-inhibiting receptor.

now called Nogo. Two other proteins, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) and oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMgp), initially isolated as major components of myelin, have also been found to inhibit the growth of some neuronal types. Intriguingly, Nogo, MAG, and OMgp bind to common membrane receptors, NogoR and PirB (Figure 50–8). NogoR, as well as related receptors

such as LINGO that have been implicated in growth

Perhaps because there are so many growth inhibitory factors and receptors, regeneration of central axons is not greatly enhanced in mutant mice lacking any one of them. However, many of the inhibitory components trigger the same intracellular signaling pathway in which RhoA is activated, thereby stimulating Rho kinase (ROCK); ROCK in turn leads to the collapse of growth cones and blocks actin and tubulin polymerization required for neurite growth. Current studies are Reactive Damaged

oligodendrocyte astrocyte

<!-- image -->

Figure 50–8 Myelin and glial scar com-

ponents that inhibit regeneration of

central axons. (Adapted from Yiu and He

2006.) Left: Myelin contains the proteins NogoA, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMgp), and myelin-associated glycopro-

tein (MAG). All three proteins are exposed when myelin breaks down. They can bind to the receptor protein NogoR, which can associate with the neurotrophin receptor p75, as well as an immunoglobulin-like receptor protein PirB. Inactivation of PirB results in a modest enhancement of corticospinal axon regeneration. Right: Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans (CSPG) are major components of the glial scar and are thought to suppress axon regeneration through interaction with the receptor tyrosine phosphatase PTP-sigma, which activates intracellular mediators such as Rho and ROCK.

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1245

PTP-Sigma

12/01/21 9:11 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

exploring whether interference with that shared path-

way might neutralize the impact of many inhibitors in

one fell swoop.

Injury-Induced Scarring Hinders Axonal Regeneration

## Myelin debris is not the only source of growth-inhibiting material in the injured brain or spinal cord. As noted

earlier, astrocytes become activated and proliferate fol-

lowing injury, acquiring features of reactive astrocytes that generate scar tissue at sites of injury. Scarring is an adaptive response that helps to limit the size of the injury, reestablish the blood-brain barrier, and reduce inflammation. But the scar itself hinders regeneration in two ways: through mechanical interference with axon growth and through growth-inhibiting effects of pro-

teins produced by cells within the scar. Chief among these inhibitors are a class of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPG) that are produced in abundance by reactive astrocytes and directly inhibit axon extension by interaction with tyrosine phosphatase receptors on axons (Figure 50–8). Attention has therefore focused on ways of dissolving the glial scar by infusion of an enzyme called chondroitinase, which breaks down the sugar chains on CSPG. This treatment promotes axon regeneration and functional recovery in animals. Drugs that reduce inflammation and decrease scarring, notably prednisolone, are also beneficial if administered shortly after injury, before the scar forms. An Intrinsic Growth Program Promotes Regeneration

## So far, we have emphasized differences between the local environments of peripheral and central axons.

However, environmental differences cannot com-

pletely account for the poor regeneration of central axons. Even though they can regenerate in peripheral nerves, central axons grow much less well than peripheral axons when navigating the same path. Thus, adult central axons may be less capable than peripheral axons of regeneration. In support of this idea, experiments in tissue culture have shown that the growth potential of central neurons decreases with age, whereas mature periph-

eral neurons extend axons robustly in a favorable environment. One potential explanation for this difference is variation in the expression of proteins thought to be critical for optimal axon elongation. One example is the 43 kDa growth-associated protein, or GAP-43. This protein is expressed at high levels in embryonic

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1246

central and peripheral neurons. In peripheral neurons,

the level remains high in maturity and increases even

more following axotomy, whereas in central neurons,

its expression decreases as development proceeds. Transcription factors required to coordinate axonal growth programs are also expressed at high levels during development, and then are downregulated in maturity. Is this reduced ability of central axons to regenerate reversible? Hope is provided by two sets of studies. One involves what has been called a "conditioning

lesion." Recall that primary sensory neurons in dorsal root ganglia have a bifurcated axon, with a peripheral branch that extends to skin, muscle, or other targets, and a central branch that enters the spinal cord. The peripheral branch regenerates well following injury, whereas the central branch regenerates poorly. However, the central branch will regenerate successfully if the peripheral branch is damaged several days before the central branch is damaged (Figure 50–9). Somehow, prior injury or conditioning lesion activates an axonal growth program. One component of the growth program responsible for regeneration of the central branch appears to be cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). This

second-messenger molecule activates enzymes that in turn promote neurite outgrowth. Levels of cAMP are high when neurons initially form circuits; they decline postnatally in central but not peripheral neurons. In some instances, increased supplies of cAMP or proteins normally activated by cAMP can promote regeneration of central axons following injury. Accordingly, drugs that increase cAMP levels or activate targets of cAMP are being actively considered as therapeutic agents to be administered following spinal cord injury. A second group of investigations has manipulated developmentally regulated intrinsic factors to restore regenerative ability in adults. For example, injury

sometimes leads to formation of cytokines such as ciliary neurotrophic factors (CNTFs) that promote growth by activating a signaling pathway involving molecules called JAK and STAT that travel to the nucleus and regulate a growth program. In adults, however, the pathway is inhibited by a protein called suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3). Deletion of the SOCS3 gene in mice relieves the inhibition and augments the ability of cytokines to promote regeneration of injured axons (Figure 50–10A). Similarly, a signaling pathway involving the kinase mammalian target or rapamycin (mTOR) regulates energy metabolism, promoting an anabolic growth-

promoting state required for axon regeneration. However, mTOR is downregulated as central neurons

12/01/21 9:11 AM

A Intact Central axon Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain

<!-- image -->


mature and is further inhibited by a phosphatase called

PTEN. Analogous to SOCS3 and JAK/STAT signaling,

deletion of the PTEN gene in mice promotes axonal

regrowth following injury to the optic nerve or spinal cord (Figure 50–10B). Moreover, loss of SOCS3 and PTEN stimulates regeneration significantly more than loss of either one. Although their multiple roles make it unlikely that either SOCS3 or PTEN is a useful target for therapy, the signaling pathways they regulate provide multiple starting points for designing drugs that could augment regeneration. Formation of New Connections by Intact Axons Can Lead to Recovery of Function Following Injury

## So far, we have discussed interventions designed to enhance the limited regenerative capacity of injured central axons. An alternative strategy focuses on the

significant, although incomplete, functional recovery that can occur following injury even without appreciable regeneration of cut axons. If the basis for this limited recovery of function can be understood, it may be possible to enhance it. A rearrangement of existing connections in response to injury may contribute to recovery of function. We have learned that axotomy leads to changes in No regeneration

both the inputs to and the targets of the injured neuron. Although many of these changes are detrimental to function, some are beneficial. In particular, the central nervous system can, following injury, spontaneously undergo adaptive reorganization that helps it regain function. For example, after transection of the descending corticospinal pathway, which occurs with many traumatic injuries of the spinal cord, the cortex can no longer transmit commands to motor neurons below the site of the lesion. Over several weeks, however, intact corticospinal axons rostral to the lesion begin to sprout new terminal branches and form synapses on spinal interneurons whose axons extend around the lesion, thereby forming an intraspinal detour that contributes to limited recovery of function (Figure 50–11). Similar instances of functional reorganization have been demonstrated in the motor cortex and brain stem. These compensatory responses attest to the latent plasPrior peripheral lesion promotes regeneration promotes regeneration cAMP GAP-43

of the central branch of a primary sensory neuron axon.

After lesions of the spinal cord, there is little regeneration

of the central branch beyond the injury site. However, if the peripheral branch of the axon is sectioned before the central branch is damaged, the latter will grow beyond the lesion site. The impact of such a "conditioning lesion" can be mimicked by elevating levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) or of the growth-associated protein GAP-43 in the peripheral branch.

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1247

ticity of the nervous system. The ability of the nervous system to rewire itself is most vigorous during the critical periods of early postnatal life but can be revived by traumatic events in adulthood (Chapter 49). How can the rewiring ability of the central nervous system be improved? It is possible that some of the beneficial effects of grafts in experimental animals

reflect reorganization of intact axons rather than regeneration of transected axons. As the nervous system's

12/01/21 9:11 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

Wild type

eration in the optic nerve.

A. The regeneration of retinal ganglion cell axons in the optic SOCS3

nerve is normally constrained by neuronal expression of several genes. One encodes SOCS3, which blocks the ability of ciliary

<!-- image -->

neurotrophic factor (CNTF) to bind its receptor GP130 and thus blocks CNTF from promoting regeneration. In SOCS3 mutant mice, ambient levels of CNTF are sufficient to improve optic nerve regeneration. Elimination of GP130 as well as SOCS3 blocks the capacity for regeneration. Addition of extra plasticity becomes better understood, therapeutic

strategies that promote specific changes in circuitry

may become possible. Perhaps most promising is an

approach in which cellular or molecular interventions that promote growth are combined with behavioral therapies that result in circuit rewiring.

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1248

No

regeneration

JAK/STAT Regeneration

No

regeneration

mTOR Regeneration

Enhanced

regeneration

CNTF enhances the capacity for regeneration in SOCS3

B. Another gene encodes PTEN, which blocks signaling through

the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, which regulates energy metabolism. Accordingly, regeneration is

enhanced in PTEN mutant mice.

C. Because SOCS3 and PTEN regulate different growthpromoting signals, mutant mice lacking both genes exhibit greater regenerative ability than either single mutant. (Adapted

from Smith et al. 2009.) Neurons in the Injured Brain Die but New

Ones Can Be Born

## The failure to grow a new axon is by no means the worst fate that can befall an injured neuron. For many

neurons, axotomy leads to the death of the cell. Efforts

12/01/21 9:11 AM

ticospinal axons can reestablish connections with motor neu- Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain Lesion site

rons by sprouting axon collaterals that innervate propriospinal

<!-- image -->

to improve recovery following injury therefore need

to consider survival of neurons and not simply the

regrowth of axons. Since neuronal death is a frequent

consequence of other neural insults, such as stroke and neurodegenerative disease, improved ways of retaining or replacing neurons would have broad utility. The loss of cells following injury is not unique to the nervous system, although in other tissues, new cells are often effective at repairing damage. This regenera-

tive capacity is most dramatic in the hematopoietic system, where a few stem cells can repopulate the entire adaptive immune system. In contrast, it has long been believed that the generation of neurons is complete by birth. Because of this, approaches to regeneration have often focused on finding ways to spare neurons that would otherwise die. This traditional view has changed, prompted initially by Joseph Altman's discovery in the 1960s that neurogenesis continues into adulthood in some parts

of the mammalian brain. Since this finding challenged fundamental tenets of prevailing dogma, the idea that new neurons could form in postnatal rodents was met with skepticism for three decades. Eventually, however, the application of better cell labeling technologies amply supported Altman's conclusion and showed that it also applies to nonhuman

primates and even, in a limited way, to humans. We are now confident that new neurons are added to the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and to the olfactory bulb throughout life, although the rate of addition declines with age. Some of the newborn cells in the dentate gyrus of the adult hippocampus die soon after

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1249

et al. 2004.)

they are born and others become glial cells, but a sub-

stantial minority differentiate into granule cells that

are indistinguishable from those born at embryonic

stages (Figure 50–12). New neurons are also added to the adult olfactory bulb. They are generated near the surface of the lateral ventricles, far from the bulb itself, and then migrate to their destination (Figure 50–13). In both cases, the new neurons extend processes, form synapses, and become integrated into functional circuits. Thus, neurons born at embryonic stages are gradually replaced by later-born neurons, so that the total number of neurons in these regions of the brain is maintained. The properties of neurons born in mature animals are not completely understood, but they appear able to recapitulate many of the properties of neurons

that arise in the embryo. When the generation of new neurons in the adult is prevented, certain behaviors mediated by the olfactory bulb and hippocampus are degraded. Conversely, some behavioral alterations are accompanied by alterations in the tempo of adult neurogenesis. Adult neurogenesis can be decreased in animal models of depression and chronic stress, whereas enrichment of the habitat of an animal or an increase in the physical activity of otherwise sedentary rodents can increase the generation of new neurons. What cells give rise to adult-born neurons? The principle that embryonic neurons and glia arise from multipotential progenitors also applies to neurons

born in adults. Stem cells are the source of neurons in the adult as well as the embryo. They are likely derived from radial glia, which also serve as a source of

12/01/21 9:11 AM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Proliferation Integration Differentiation

<!-- image -->

pathway CA1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

pocampal circuits.  The diagrams on the left show the path- ing green fluorescence protein. (Micrographs reproduced, with

ways of neuronal differentiation and integration into dentate neurons during embryonic development (Chapter 46).

permission, from F. Gage.) neurons in large enough numbers to replace those lost

A subset of these cells exit the cell cycle during gesta-

tion, become quiescent, and take up residence near the

ventricular surface. In adulthood, they are activated, reenter the cell cycle, and give rise to neurons. Although so far adult neurogenesis has not been directly linked to repair of damaged tissue, its discovery has influenced research on recovery from injury in

two important ways. First, the findings that endogenously generated neurons can differentiate and extend processes through the thicket of adult neuropil, and can be integrated into functional circuits, led researchers to test the idea that the same could be true for trans planted neurons or precursors. Second, since neural precursors can be induced to divide and differentiate, strategies designed to augment this innate ability are now being considered, with the goal of producing

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1250

to injury or neurodegenerative disease. As we describe

below, these ideas have progressed over the past few

decades from science fiction to efforts that are tantaliz ingly close to clinical tests. Therapeutic Interventions May Retain or Replace Injured Central Neurons

-

## Transplantation of Neurons or Their Progenitors Can Replace Lost Neurons

## -For many years, neurologists have transplanted developing neurons into experimental animals to see if the new neurons could reverse the effects of injury or dis-

ease. These attempts have had promising results in a few cases.

12/01/21 9:11 AM

A Neurogenesis Stem cell astrocyte

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 50–13 The origin and fate of neurons born

in the adult ventricular zone. (Adapted from Tavazoie et al.

2008.)

A. Neuroblasts develop in an orderly progression from astrocytic stem cells via a population of cells within a local niche

close to blood vessels in the subventricular zone. (Abbreviation:

CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.)

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1251

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain

Subventricular

zone

Dentate

gyrus

<!-- image -->

B. Neuroblasts differentiate into immature neurons that migrate

to the olfactory bulb using astrocytes as guides. They crawl

along each other in a process called chain migration.

- C. On arrival in the olfactory bulb, immature neurons differentiate into granule cells and periglomerular cells, two classes of olfactory bulb interneurons. (Image reproduced, with
2. permission, from A. Mizrahi.)


12/01/21 9:11 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

One is to replace dopaminergic cells that die in

Parkinson disease. When transplanted into the stria-

tum, these neurons release dopamine onto their tar-

gets without the need to grow long axons or form elaborate synapses (Figure 50–14). Another is to transplant immature inhibitory interneurons from the ganglionic eminences in which they are produced (Chapter 46) to the cortex, where they mature and form synapses. By enhancing inhibition, these neurons attenuate the manifestations of disorders in

A Normal B Parkinson disease which insufficient inhibitory drive plays a role, such as epilepsy and anxiety.

Unfortunately, application of these methods to

human patients has been fraught with difficulties. One is the difficulty of obtaining and growing develop-

ing neurons in sufficient numbers and with sufficient purity. Second, it has been challenging to modify neurons by introducing new genes so as to improve their chances of functioning in a new environment. Third, in many cases, the grafted neurons are already too mature

C Recovery

<!-- image -->

cells into the putamen.

A. In the healthy brain, dopaminergic projections from the substantia nigra (SN) innervate the putamen, which in turn activates neurons in the globus pallidus (GP). Pallidal outputs to the brain

and spinal cord facilitate movement. The image below shows melanin-rich dopaminergic neurons in human substantia nigra. B. In Parkinson disease, the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra deprives the putamen–globus pallidus

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1252

Injection of

DA neurons

substantia nigra of an individual with Parkinson disease.

C. Direct injection of embryonic dopaminergic neurons into the putamen reactivates the globus pallidus output pathways. The image below shows tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the cell

bodies and axons of embryonic mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons grafted into the putamen of a human patient. (Image reproduced, with permission, from Kordower and Sortwell 2000. Copyright © 2000. Published by Elsevier B.V.)

12/01/21 9:11 AM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

One is to replace dopaminergic cells that die in

Parkinson disease. When transplanted into the stria-

tum, these neurons release dopamine onto their tar-

gets without the need to grow long axons or form elaborate synapses (Figure 50–14). Another is to transplant immature inhibitory interneurons from the ganglionic eminences in which they are produced (Chapter 46) to the cortex, where they mature and form synapses. By enhancing inhibition, these neurons attenuate the manifestations of disorders in

A Normal B Parkinson disease which insufficient inhibitory drive plays a role, such as epilepsy and anxiety.

Unfortunately, application of these methods to

human patients has been fraught with difficulties. One is the difficulty of obtaining and growing develop-

ing neurons in sufficient numbers and with sufficient purity. Second, it has been challenging to modify neurons by introducing new genes so as to improve their chances of functioning in a new environment. Third, in many cases, the grafted neurons are already too mature

C Recovery

<!-- image -->

cells into the putamen.

A. In the healthy brain, dopaminergic projections from the substantia nigra (SN) innervate the putamen, which in turn activates neurons in the globus pallidus (GP). Pallidal outputs to the brain

and spinal cord facilitate movement. The image below shows melanin-rich dopaminergic neurons in human substantia nigra. B. In Parkinson disease, the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra deprives the putamen–globus pallidus

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1252

Injection of

DA neurons

substantia nigra of an individual with Parkinson disease.

C. Direct injection of embryonic dopaminergic neurons into the putamen reactivates the globus pallidus output pathways. The image below shows tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the cell

bodies and axons of embryonic mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons grafted into the putamen of a human patient. (Image reproduced, with permission, from Kordower and Sortwell 2000. Copyright © 2000. Published by Elsevier B.V.)

12/01/21 9:11 AM

to differentiate properly or to integrate effectively into

functional circuits.

These obstacles can be overcome by transplanting

neural precursors into the adult brain where they can go on to differentiate into neurons in a hospitable envi-

ronment. Several classes of precursors have been transplanted successfully, including neural stem cells and committed precursors. Some initial success has been obtained with embryonic stem (ES) cells. These cells are derived from early blastocyst stage embryos and can give rise to all cells of the body. Because they can divide indefinitely in culture, large numbers of cells can be generated, induced to differentiate, and then engrafted. More recently, this technology has been enhanced by the molecular reprogramming of skin fibroblast cells to create induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells

Human- induced pluripotent

stem cells

<!-- image -->

glial types.  The precursors can then be transplanted into the

brain or spinal cord, where cells complete their differentiation

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1253

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain


(Figure 50–15). These cells have a distinct advantage

over ES cells; embryos are not required for their pro-

duction, effectively bypassing a minefield of practi-

cal, political, and ethical concerns that have hindered research using human ES cells. Another advantage of iPS cells is that they can be generated from an individual patient's own skin cells, neatly avoiding issues of immunological incompatibility. It is also possible to genetically modify the iPS cells in culture by repairing a defective gene before transplantation. Because ES and iPS cells have the potential to generate any cell type, it is essential that their differentiation be guided along specific pathways in culture before they

are transplanted. Methods for generating specific classes of neural precursors, neurons, and glial cells from ES and iPS cells have now been devised (Figure 50–15).

OPC

oligodendrocyte

,

OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell.) (Adapted, with permission,

from Wen et al. 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.)

12/01/21 9:11 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

For example, it is possible to generate neurons that pos-

sess many or all of the properties of the spinal motor

neurons that are lost in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

(Figure 50–16) or to generate the dopaminergic neurons lost from the striatum in Parkinson disease and then to engraft such neurons into the spinal cord or brain. Although many hurdles need to be overcome, clinical trials using ES and iPS cell-derived neurons are underway. In addition, these cells are being used in

chemical screens to identify compounds that counteract the cellular defects that underlie human neurodegenerative disease. Stimulation of Neurogenesis in Regions of Injury May Contribute to Restoring Function

## What if, following injury in adults, endogenous neuronal precursors could be stimulated to produce

Figure 50–16 Induced pluripotent stem cells

derived from an individual with amyotrophic

lateral sclerosis (ALS) can differentiate into

spinal motor neurons. Fibroblasts from the skin of a patient with ALS were used to generate induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which were then directed to a motor neuron fate (see Figure 50–15). These cells can be used to analyze mechanisms that underlie motor neuron loss in ALS. The images at right show (from top to bottom) cultured fibroblasts, an iPS cell clump, and differentiated motor neurons expressing characteristic nuclear transcription factors (green) and axonal proteins (red). (Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from C. Henderson, H. Wichterle, G. Croft, and M. Weygandt.)

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1254

neurons capable of replacing those that have been lost?

Two sets of recent findings suggest that this idea is not

so far-fetched.

First, precursors capable of forming neurons in culture have been isolated from many parts of the adult nervous system, including the cerebral cortex

and spinal cord, even though neurogenesis in adults is ordinarily confined to the olfactory bulb and hippocampus. This diversion of cell fate led to the idea that neurogenesis in the adult occurs in only a few sites, because only they contain appropriate permissive or stimulatory factors. This hypothesis has spurred a search for such factors, in the hope that they could be used to render a larger range of sites capable of supporting neurogenesis. Second, in a few cases, the generation of new neurons can be stimulated by traumatic or ischemic injury (akin to stroke), even in areas such as the cerebral cortex

Collect

skin broblasts

<!-- image -->

12/01/21 9:11 AM

or spinal cord in which neurogenesis normally fails to

occur. The fact that recovery after stroke and injury is

poor demonstrates that spontaneous compensatory

neurogenesis, if it occurs in humans, is insufficient for tissue repair. However, injury-induced neurogenesis has been enhanced in experimental animals in several ways. In one, administration of growth factors promotes neuronal production from progenitors grown in culture. In another, glial cells that retain the capacity to divide, such as Müller glia in the retina or astrocytes in the cortex, are reprogrammed to differentiate into neurons. If such interventions could be adapted to humans, the range of neurons subject to replacement would be greatly increased. Transplantation of Nonneuronal Cells or Their Progenitors Can Improve Neuronal Function

## Cells other than neurons are lost after brain injury. Among the most profound losses are those of oligodendrocytes, the cells that form the myelin sheath

around central axons. The stripping of myelin continues long after traumatic injury and contributes to progressive loss of function of axons that may not have been injured directly. Normal

Figure 50–17 Restoration of

myelination in the central nervous

system by transplanted oligo- Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain

dendrocyte stem cells. In rodents with demyelinated axons, grafts of oligodendrocyte precursor cells can restore myelination to near normal. Sections through central nerve tracts are shown in the images at right. (Adapted, with permission, from Franklin and ffrench-Constant 2008. Copyright © 2008 Springer Nature.)


Although the adult brain and spinal cord are capa-

ble of generating new oligodendrocytes and replacing

lost myelin, this production is insufficient to restore

function in many cases. Since several common neurological diseases, most notably multiple sclerosis, are accompanied by a profound state of demyelination, there is strong interest in providing the nervous system with additional oligodendrocyte precursors in order to augment remyelination. Neural stem cells, multipotential progenitors, ES cells, and iPS cells can give rise not only to neurons but also to nonneural cells, including oligodendrocytes

and their direct precursors. Indeed, at present, human ES cells are being channeled into oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and implanted into injured spinal cords of experimental animals. Transplanted cells that differentiate into oligodendrocytes enhance remyelination and substantially improve the locomotor ability of experimental animals (Figure 50–17). Restoration of Function Is the Aim of Regenerative Therapies

## We need to bear in mind that efforts to replace central neurons or to enhance the regeneration of their axons

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1255

12/01/21 9:11 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Figure 50–18 Regenerated retinal ganglion axons in the

optic nerve can form functional synapses. (Adapted, with

permission, from Keirstead et al. 1989. Copyright © 1989

AAAS.) A. A segment of optic nerve in an adult rat was removed, and a segment of sciatic nerve was grafted in its place. The other end of the sciatic nerve was attached to the superior collicu-

lus. Some retinal ganglion cell axons regenerated through the sciatic nerve and entered the superior colliculus. B. Once the axons of the retinal ganglion neurons had regenerated, recordings were made from the superior colliculus. Flashes of light delivered to the eye elicited action potentials

- in collicular neurons, demonstrating that at least some regenerated axons had formed functional synapses.

would be of little use if these axons were unable to

A

Graft

<!-- image -->

form functional synapses with their target cells. The

same fundamental questions asked about axon regen-

eration in adults therefore apply to synaptogenesis: Can it happen, and if not, why not? It has been difficult to address these questions because axonal regeneration following experimentally induced injury is usually so poor that the axons never

reach appropriate target fields. However, several of the studies discussed earlier in this chapter offer hope that synapse formation is possible within the dense adult neuropil. In fact, axon branches that regenerate following injury can form synapses on nearby targets. For example, Aguayo and his colleagues found that retinal axons were able to regrow into the superior colliculus when they were channeled through a peripheral nerve that had been grafted into the optic nerve (Figure 50–18A). Remarkably, some collicular neurons fired action potentials when the eye was illuminated, showing that functional synaptic connections had been reestablished (Figure 50–18B). More recent studies have promoted regeneration of severed axons by enhancing their intrinsic growth programs, as described above, and observed some restoration of function. Likewise, neurons that arise endogenously or are implanted by investigators can form and receive

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1256

synapses. Thus, there is reason to believe that if injured

axons can be induced to regenerate, or new neurons

supplied to replace lost ones, they will wire up in ways

that help restore lost functions and behaviors. Highlights

1.

When axons are transected, the distal segment

degenerates, a process called Wallerian degen-

eration. The proximal segment and cell body also

- undergo changes, as do the injured neuron's synaptic inputs and targets. 2. It was long thought that Wallerian degeneration was a passive and inevitable consequence of the distal segment being deprived of sustenance
- from the cell body, but it is not known to be an active, regulated process. Genes called NMNAT and SARM1 are key components of a core signaling pathway that controls the process. Intervention in the pathway can slow or even halt degeneration. 3. Axons can regenerate and form new synapses following injury, but in mammals, regeneration is far more widespread and effective in peripheral
- axons than in central axons.

12/01/21 9:11 AM

4.

A key factor in the differential response of

peripheral and central axons is that the environ-

ment confronting injured central axons is poor at

- supporting growth. It both lacks nutritive factors present in the pathway of peripheral nerves and contains growth-inhibitory factors absent from peripheral nerves. 5. Structures that inhibit regeneration include myelin fragments that persist following Wallerian degeneration and astrocytes that form glial
- scars at injury sites. Inhibitory factors in myelin include Nogo and myelin-associated glycoprotein. Inhibitory factors secreted by astrocytes include chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. 6. Central regeneration is also hindered by intrinsic decreased ability of adult central neurons to grow, due to downregulation of growth pro-
- grams active during development. Interventions that restore or disinhibit growth pathways, such as JAK/STAT and mTOR signaling, enable regeneration. 7. However, it is important to note that the failure of regeneration following injury may be related to the stabilization of connections that occurs at
- the end of critical periods. For example, myelination, which occurs largely at the end of a critical period, may have the secondary effect of preventing further, large-scale rearrangement of synaptic connections. Thus, caution will be needed to ensure that treatments aimed at fostering recovery following injury do not end up promoting formation of maladaptive circuits. 8. Another approach for restoring function following damage is to harness the ability of intact axons to form new connections, generating adap-
- tive circuits that can compensate to some extent for those lost to injury. 9. The traditional view that all neurogenesis occurs during or shortly after gestation has now been modified by the discovery that new neurons are
- born throughout life in a few brain areas. These neurons arise from resident stem cells and can integrate into functional circuits. 10. Cells capable of forming new neurons are also present in many other areas of the brain and spinal cord but remain quiescent. Attempts to
- activate them by providing growth factors or introducing growth-promoting genes (transcriptional reprogramming) could harness their potential following injury or in neurodegenerative disease. 11. Another approach to neuronal replacement is to implant developing neurons. Although fetal

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1257

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain


neurons are sometimes used for this purpose in

experimental animals, a more useful source may

be neurons derived from ES or iPS cells. They can

- be grown in large quantities, genetically modified if necessary, and treated to differentiate into specific neuronal types. Clinical studies using this approach are now beginning.

Joshua R. Sanes

Selected Reading

Benowitz LI, He Z, Goldberg JL. 2017. Reaching the brain:

advances in optic nerve regeneration. Exp Neurol

## 287:365–373.

- Dell'Anno MT, Strittmatter SM. 2017. Rewiring the spinal cord: direct and indirect strategies. Neurosci Lett 652: 625–634.
- Gerdts J, Summers DW, Milbrandt J, DiAntonio A. 2016. Axon self-destruction: new links among SARM1, MAPKs, and NAD+ metabolism. Neuron 89:449–460.
- He Z, Jin Y. 2016. Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 90:437–451. Magnusson JP, Frisén J. 2016. Stars from the darkest night:
- unlocking the neurogenic potential of astrocytes in different brain regions. Development 143:1075–1086.
- McComish SF, Caldwell MA. 2018. Generation of defined neural populations from pluripotent stem cells. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 373:pii: 20170214.
- Zhao C, Deng W, Gage FH. 2008. Mechanisms and functional implications of adult neurogenesis. Cell 132:645–660.
- References Alilain WJ, Horn KP, Hu H, Dick TE, Silver J. 2011. Func-

tional regeneration of respiratory pathways after spinal

cord injury. Nature 475:196–200.

- Altman J. 1969. Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis. IV. Cell proliferation and migration in the anterior forebrain, with special reference
- to persisting neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 137:433–457. Altman J, Das GD. 1965. Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124:319–335.
- Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Raineteau O, Mettenleiter TC, Weinmann O, Schwab ME. 2004. The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new intraspinal circuit in
- adult rats. Nat Neurosci 7:269–277. Bei F, Lee HHC, Liu X, et al. 2016. Restoration of visual function by enhancing conduction in regenerated axons. Cell 164:219–232.

12/01/21 9:11 AM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Beirowski B, Berek L, Adalbert R, et al. 2004. Quantitative

and qualitative analysis of Wallerian degeneration using

restricted axonal labelling in YFP-H mice. J Neurosci

- Methods 134:23–35. Bradbury EJ, McMahon SB. 2006. Spinal cord repair strategies: why do they work? Nat Rev Neurosci 7:644–653. Bradbury EJ, Moon LD, Popat RJ, et al. 2002. Chondroitinase
- ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature 416:636–640.
- Caroni P, Schwab ME. 1988. Antibody against myelinassociated inhibitor of neurite growth neutralizes nonpermissive substrate properties of CNS white matter. Neuron
- 1:85–96. Conforti L, Gilley J, Coleman MP. 2014. Wallerian degeneration: an emerging axon death pathway linking injury and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:394–409.
- David S, Aguayo AJ. 1981. Axonal elongation into peripheral nervous system "bridges" after central nervous system injury in adult rats. Science 214:931–933.
- Dimos JT, Rodolfa KT, Niakan KK, et al. 2008. Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with ALS can be differentiated into motor neurons. Science 321:1218–1221.
- Duan X, Qiao M, Bei F, Kim IJ, He Z, Sanes JR. 2015. Subtypespecific regeneration of retinal ganglion cells following axotomy: effects of osteopontin and mTOR signaling.
- Neuron 85:1244–1256. Essuman K, Summers DW, Sasaki Y, Mao X, DiAntonio A, Milbrandt J. 2017. The SARM1 toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain possesses intrinsic NAD+ cleavage activity
- that promotes pathological axonal degeneration. Neuron 93:1334–1343. Ferri A, Sanes JR, Coleman MP, Cunningham JM, Kato AC. 2003. Inhibiting axon degeneration and synapse loss attenuates apoptosis and disease progression in a mouse
- model of motoneuron disease. Curr Biol 13:669–673. Franklin RJ, ffrench-Constant C. 2008. Remyelination in the CNS: from biology to therapy. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:839–855.
- Galtrey CM, Fawcett JW. 2007. The role of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in regeneration and plasticity in the central nervous system. Brain Res Rev 54:1–18.
- Gerdts J, Brace EJ, Sasaki Y, DiAntonio A, Milbrandt J. 2015. SARM1 activation triggers axon degeneration locally via NAD + destruction. Science 348:453–457.
- Gerdts J, Summers DW, Sasaki Y, DiAntonio A, Milbrandt J. 2013. Sarm1-mediated axon degeneration requires both SAM and TIR interactions. J Neurosci 33:13569–13580.
- Goldman SA, Kuypers NJ. 2015. How to make an oligodendrocyte. Development 142:3983-3995. Guo Z, Zhang L, Wu Z, Chen Y, Wang F, Chen G. 2014. In
- vivo direct reprogramming of reactive glial cells into functional neurons after brain injury and in an Alzheimer's
- disease model. Cell Stem Cell 14:188–202. Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Ohtsuka T. 2008. Roles of continuous neurogenesis in the structural and functional integrity of the adult forebrain. Nat Neurosci 10:1153–1161.

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1258

Jorstad NL, Wilken MS, Grimes WN, et al. 2017. Stimulation

of functional neuronal regeneration from Müller glia in

adult mice. Nature 548:103–107.

- Keirstead HS, Nistor G, Bernal G, et al. 2005. Human embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and restore locomotion after spi-
- nal cord injury. J Neurosci 25:4694–4705. Keirstead SA, Rasminsky M, Fukuda Y, Carter DA, Aguayo AJ, Vidal-Sanz M. 1989. Electrophysiologic responses in hamster superior colliculus evoked by regenerating reti-
- nal axons. Science 246:255–257. Kordower J, Sortwell C. 2000. Neuropathology of fetal nigra transplants for Parkinson's disease. Prog Brain Res 127:333–344.
- Lim DA, Alvarez-Buylla A. 2016. The adult ventricularsubventricular zone (V-SVZ) and olfactory bulb (OB) Neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8:pii: a018820.
- Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A. 1994. Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain. Science 264: 1145–1148.
- Mack TGA, Reiner M, Beirowski B, et al. 2001. Wallerian degeneration of injured axons and synapses is delayed by a Ube4b/Nmnat chimeric gene. Nat Neurosci 4:1199–1206.
- Magavi SS, Leavitt BR, Macklis JD. 2000. Induction of neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult mice. Nature 405:951–955. Magnusson JP, Göritz C, Tatarishvili J, et al. 2014. A latent
- neurogenic program in astrocytes regulated by Notch signaling in the mouse. Science 346:237–241.
- Maier IC, Schwab ME. 2006. Sprouting, regeneration and circuit formation in the injured spinal cord: factors and activity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361:1611–1634.
- Osterloh JM, Yang J, Rooney TM, et al. 2012. dSarm/Sarm1 is required for activation of an injury-induced axon death pathway. Science 337:481–484.
- Schwab ME, Thoenen H. 1985. Dissociated neurons regenerate into sciatic but not optic nerve explants in culture irrespective of neurotrophic factors. J Neurosci 5:2415–2423.
- Schwegler G, Schwab ME, Kapfhammer JP. 1995. Increased collateral sprouting of primary afferents in the myelinfree spinal cord. J Neurosci 15:2756–2767.
- Smith PD, Sun F, Park KK, et al. 2009. SOCS3 deletion promotes optic nerve regeneration in vivo. Neuron 64:617–623.
- Sohur US, Emsley JG, Mitchell BD, Macklis JD. 2006. Adult neurogenesis and cellular brain repair with neural progenitors, precursors and stem cells. Philos Trans R Soc
- Lond B Biol Sci 361:1477–1497. Southwell DG, Nicholas CR, Basbaum AI, et al. 2014. Interneurons from embryonic development to cell-based therapy. Science 344:1240622.
- Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, et al. 2007. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 131:861–872.
- Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. 2006. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126:663–676.

12/01/21 9:11 AM

Tavazoie M, Van der Verken L, Silva-Vargas V, et al. 2008. A

specialized vascular niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell

Stem Cell 3:279–288.

- Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH. 2006. Therapeutic interventions after spinal cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 7: 628–643.
- Torper O, Ottosson DR, Pereira M, et al. 2015. In vivo reprogramming of striatal NG2 glia into functional neurons that integrate into local host circuitry. Cell Rep 12:474–481.
- Wen Z, Christian KM, Song H, Ming GL. 2016. Modeling psychiatric disorders with patient-derived iPSCs. Curr Opin Neurobiol 36:118–127.

Kandel-Ch50\_1236-1259.indd 1259

Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain


Wernig M, Zhao JP, Pruszak J, et al. 2008. Neurons derived from

reprogrammed fibroblasts functionally integrate into the

fetal brain and improve symptoms of rats with Parkinson's

- disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:5856–5861. Winkler C, Kirik D, Bjorklund A. 2005. Cell transplantation in Parkinson's disease: how can we make it work? Trends Neurosci 28:86–92.
- Yiu G, He Z. 2006. Glial inhibition of CNS axon regeneration. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:617–627. Zhou FQ, Snider WD. 2006. Intracellular control of develop-
- mental and regenerative axon growth. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361:1575–1592.

12/01/21 9:11 AM


Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System

Genes and Hormones Determine Physical Differences

Between Males and Females

Chromosomal Sex Directs the Gonadal Differentiation of

## the Embryo Gonads Synthesize Hormones That Promote

Sexual Differentiation Disorders of Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis Affect

Sexual Differentiation Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System Generates

Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors Erectile Function Is Controlled by a Sexually Dimorphic

## Circuit in the Spinal Cord Song Production in Birds Is Controlled by Sexually

Dimorphic Circuits in the Forebrain Mating Behavior in Mammals Is Controlled by a Sexually

Dimorphic Neural Circuit in the Hypothalamus Environmental Cues Regulate Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors

Pheromones Control Partner Choice in Mice

## Early Experience Modifies Later Maternal Behavior

A Set of Core Mechanisms Underlies Many Sexual Dimorphisms in the Brain and Spinal Cord The physical differences between men and women that underlie partner recognition and reproduction are obvious to all of us, and their developmental origins are well understood. In contrast, our understanding of behavioral differences between the sexes is primitive. In many cases, their very existence remains controversial, and the origins of those that have been clearly demonstrated remain unclear. In this chapter, we first briefly summarize the embryological basis of sexual differentiation. We then discuss at greater length the behavioral differences between the two sexes, focusing on those differences or dimorphisms for which some neurobiological basis has been found. These dimorphisms include physiological responses (erection, lactation), drives (maternal behavior), and even more complex behaviors (gender identity). In analyzing these dimorphisms, we will discuss three issues. First, what are the genetic origins of sexual differences? Human males and females have a complement of 23 chromosomal pairs, and only one differs between

The Human Brain Is Sexually Dimorphic

Sexual Dimorphisms in Humans May Arise From Hormonal Action or Experience

## Dimorphic Structures in the Brain Correlate with Gender

Identity and Sexual Orientation Highlights

F

the sexes. Females have a pair of X chromosomes (and are therefore XX), whereas males have one copy of the X chromosome paired with a Y chromosome (XY). The other 22 chromosome pairs, called autosomes, are shared between males and females. We will see that the initial genetic determinants arise from a single gene on the Y chromosome, while later ones arise indirectly from sex-specific patterns of expression imposed upon other genes as development proceeds. Second, how are sexual differences initiated by the Y chromosome translated into differences between the brains of men and women? We will see that key intermeaning than

ew words are more loaded with

the word "sex." Sexual activity is a biological

imperative and a major human preoccupation.

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1260

mediates are the sex hormones, a set of steroids that

20/01/21 2:57 PM

includes testosterone and estrogens. These hormones

act during embryogenesis as well as postnatally, first

organizing the physical development of both genitalia

and brain regions, and later activating particular physiological and behavioral responses. Hormonal regulation is especially complex because the nervous system, which is profoundly influenced by sex steroids, also controls their synthesis. This feedback loop may help to explain how the external environment, including social and cultural factors, can ultimately shape sexual dimorphism at a neural level. Third, what are the crucial neural differences that underlie sexually dimorphic behaviors? Clear physical and molecular differences between the brains of men

and women have been found. These differences reflect differences in neural circuitry between the sexes, and in a few cases, these distinctions in connectivity are directly related to behavioral differences. In other cases, however, sexually dimorphic behaviors appear to result from differential usage of the same basic circuits. Before proceeding, we must define two words that are commonly used in many ways and sometimes confused with each other: sex and gender. As a descriptor

of biological differences between men and women, the word sex is used in three ways. First, anatomical sex refers to overt differences including the differences in the external genitalia as well as other sexual characteristics such as the distribution of body hair. Gonadal sex refers to the presence of male or female gonads, the testes or ovaries. Finally, chromosomal sex refers to the distribution of the sex chromosomes between females (XX) and males (XY). Whereas sex is a biological term, gender encompasses the collection of social behaviors and mental states that typically differ between males and females.

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


neural circuits gives us a more realistic framework

with which to answer this question compared to our

predecessors, who were constrained by the simplis-

tic view that genes and experience acted in mutually exclusive ways. Genes and Hormones Determine Physical

Differences Between Males and Females

## Chromosomal Sex Directs the Gonadal Differentiation of the Embryo

## Sex determination is the embryonic process whereby chromosomal sex directs the differentiation of the

gonadal sex of the animal. Surprisingly, this process

differs in fundamental ways within the animal kingdom and even among vertebrates. In most mammals, including humans, however, an XY genotype drives differentiation of the embryonic gonad into testes, whereas an XX genotype leads to ovarian differentiation. Hormones produced by the testes and ovaries subsequently direct sexual differentiation of the nervous system and the rest of the body. It is the presence of the Y chromosome rather than the lack of a second X chromosome that is the crucial determinant of male differentiation. This was first evi -

--dent in rare individuals born with two or even three X chromosomes in addition to a Y chromosome (XXY or XXXY). These individuals are men who exhibit maletypical traits. In fact, female cells do not have two active X chromosomes. Early in embryogenesis, one of the two X chromosomes in each female cell is cho -sen at random for inactivation, and the genes on it are rendered transcriptionally silent. Thus, both male and female cells have a single active X chromosome, and male cells also have a Y chromosome. The sex-determining activity of the Y chromosome is encoded by the gene SRY (sex-determining region on Y) whose activity is required for masculinization of

Gender role is the set of behaviors and social manner isms that is typically distributed in a sexually dimorphic fashion within the population. Toy preferences in children as well as distinctive attire are some exam ples of gender roles that can distinguish males from females. Gender identity is the feeling of belonging to the category of the male or female sex. Importantly, gender identity is distinct from sexual orientation, the erotic responsiveness displayed toward members of one or the other sex. Are gender and sexual orientation genetically determined? Or are they social constructs molded by cultural expectations and personal experience? As the

examples in this chapter will illustrate, we are still far from untangling the contributions of genes and environment to these complex phenomena. However, our recognition that genes and experience interact to shape

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1261

the embryonic gonads (Figure 51–1). Inactivation or deletion of SRY leads to complete sex reversal: Individuals are chromosomally male (XY) but externally indistinguishable from females. Conversely, in rare instances, SRY translocates to another chromosome (to the X chromosome or an autosome) during spermatogenesis. Such sperm can fertilize eggs to produce individuals who are chromosomally female (XX) but externally male. However, such XX sex-reversed men are infertile, as many of the genes required for sperm function are located on the Y chromosome. How does SRY instruct the undifferentiated gonads to develop into testes? The female differentiation

20/01/21 2:57 PM
includes testosterone and estrogens. These hormones

act during embryogenesis as well as postnatally, first

organizing the physical development of both genitalia

and brain regions, and later activating particular physiological and behavioral responses. Hormonal regulation is especially complex because the nervous system, which is profoundly influenced by sex steroids, also controls their synthesis. This feedback loop may help to explain how the external environment, including social and cultural factors, can ultimately shape sexual dimorphism at a neural level. Third, what are the crucial neural differences that underlie sexually dimorphic behaviors? Clear physical and molecular differences between the brains of men

and women have been found. These differences reflect differences in neural circuitry between the sexes, and in a few cases, these distinctions in connectivity are directly related to behavioral differences. In other cases, however, sexually dimorphic behaviors appear to result from differential usage of the same basic circuits. Before proceeding, we must define two words that are commonly used in many ways and sometimes confused with each other: sex and gender. As a descriptor

of biological differences between men and women, the word sex is used in three ways. First, anatomical sex refers to overt differences including the differences in the external genitalia as well as other sexual characteristics such as the distribution of body hair. Gonadal sex refers to the presence of male or female gonads, the testes or ovaries. Finally, chromosomal sex refers to the distribution of the sex chromosomes between females (XX) and males (XY). Whereas sex is a biological term, gender encompasses the collection of social behaviors and mental states that typically differ between males and females.

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


neural circuits gives us a more realistic framework

with which to answer this question compared to our

predecessors, who were constrained by the simplis-

tic view that genes and experience acted in mutually exclusive ways. Genes and Hormones Determine Physical

Differences Between Males and Females

## Chromosomal Sex Directs the Gonadal Differentiation of the Embryo

## Sex determination is the embryonic process whereby chromosomal sex directs the differentiation of the

gonadal sex of the animal. Surprisingly, this process

differs in fundamental ways within the animal kingdom and even among vertebrates. In most mammals, including humans, however, an XY genotype drives differentiation of the embryonic gonad into testes, whereas an XX genotype leads to ovarian differentiation. Hormones produced by the testes and ovaries subsequently direct sexual differentiation of the nervous system and the rest of the body. It is the presence of the Y chromosome rather than the lack of a second X chromosome that is the crucial determinant of male differentiation. This was first evi -

--dent in rare individuals born with two or even three X chromosomes in addition to a Y chromosome (XXY or XXXY). These individuals are men who exhibit maletypical traits. In fact, female cells do not have two active X chromosomes. Early in embryogenesis, one of the two X chromosomes in each female cell is cho -sen at random for inactivation, and the genes on it are rendered transcriptionally silent. Thus, both male and female cells have a single active X chromosome, and male cells also have a Y chromosome. The sex-determining activity of the Y chromosome is encoded by the gene SRY (sex-determining region on Y) whose activity is required for masculinization of

Gender role is the set of behaviors and social manner isms that is typically distributed in a sexually dimorphic fashion within the population. Toy preferences in children as well as distinctive attire are some exam ples of gender roles that can distinguish males from females. Gender identity is the feeling of belonging to the category of the male or female sex. Importantly, gender identity is distinct from sexual orientation, the erotic responsiveness displayed toward members of one or the other sex. Are gender and sexual orientation genetically determined? Or are they social constructs molded by cultural expectations and personal experience? As the

examples in this chapter will illustrate, we are still far from untangling the contributions of genes and environment to these complex phenomena. However, our recognition that genes and experience interact to shape

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1261

the embryonic gonads (Figure 51–1). Inactivation or deletion of SRY leads to complete sex reversal: Individuals are chromosomally male (XY) but externally indistinguishable from females. Conversely, in rare instances, SRY translocates to another chromosome (to the X chromosome or an autosome) during spermatogenesis. Such sperm can fertilize eggs to produce individuals who are chromosomally female (XX) but externally male. However, such XX sex-reversed men are infertile, as many of the genes required for sperm function are located on the Y chromosome. How does SRY instruct the undifferentiated gonads to develop into testes? The female differentiation

20/01/21 2:57 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Normal crossover


Abnormal crossover


SRY


∆SRY


<!-- image -->

major, generally irreversible, aspects of cell and tissue

differentiation. Later, some of the same hormones trig-

ger physiological or behavioral responses. These influ-

ences, generally termed activational, are reversible. One example of an organizational role of gonadal hormones is seen in the differentiation of structures that connect the gonads to the external genitalia. In

resides on the nonhomologous region of the short arm of the

Y chromosome. The presence of SRY is determinative for male differentiation in many mammals, including primates and most rodents. Normally X- or Y-bearing sperm fertilize an oocyte to generate XX females or XY males, and the resulting phenotypic sex is concordant for the chromosomal sex. Rarely, SRY translocates to the X chromosome or an autosome (not shown). In such cases, XX SRY offspring are phenotypically male, whereas XY ΔSRY offspring (the Δ indicating a gene deletion) are phenotypically female. (Adapted from Wilhelm, Palmer, and Koopman 2007.) program appears to be the default mode; patterning

males, the Wolffian duct gives rise to the vas deferens, the seminal vesicles, and the epididymis. In females, the Müllerian duct differentiates into the oviduct, the uterus, and the vagina (Figure 51–2). Initially, both female (XX) and male (XY) embryos possess Wolffian and Müllerian ducts. In males, the developing testes secrete a protein hormone, the Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), and a steroid hormone, testosterone. MIS leads to a regression of the Müllerian duct, and testosterone induces the Wolffian duct to differentiate into its mature derivatives. In females, the absence of MIS permits the Müllerian duct to differentiate into its adult derivatives, and the absence of circulating testosterone causes the Wolffian duct to resorb. Thus, the Y chromosome overrides a female default program to generate male gonads, which in turn secrete hormones that override a female default program of genital differentiation. The action of MIS is largely confined to embryos, but steroid hormones exert effects throughout life— that is, they also have activational roles at later stages. Female phenotype

genes prime the body and gonads to develop along

female-specific pathways. The SRY gene encodes a

transcription factor that regulates expression of genes, some of which prevent execution of the default program and initiate the process of male gonadal differentiation. One of the best-studied targets of the SRY transcription factor is another transcription factor, SOX9, which is required for differentiation of the testes. Thus, SRY initiates a cascade of inductive interactions that ultimately lead to male-specific gonad development. Gonads Synthesize Hormones That Promote Sexual Differentiation All of the steroid hormones derive from cholesterol (Figure 51–3). The sex steroids can be divided into androgens, which generally promote male characteristics, and the estrogens plus progesterone that promote female characteristics. The testes produce mostly the androgen testosterone, while the ovaries produce mostly progesterone and an estrogen, 17-β-estradiol. The menstrual cycle is a good example of the activational function of estrogen and progesterone. A glance at the metabolic relationships among steroid hormones (Figure 51–3) reveals a surprise. The female hormone progesterone is the precursor of

## The chromosomal complement of the embryo directs sexual differentiation of the gonads, and in turn, the

gonads determine the sex-specific features of all organs

of the body, including the nervous system. They do this by secreting hormones. Gonadal hormones have two major roles. Their developmental role is traditionally referred to as organizational because the early effects of hormones on the brain and the rest of the body lead to

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1262

the male hormone testosterone, and testosterone is the direct precursor of the female hormone 17-β-estradiol. Thus, the enzymes that convert one hormone to the other control not only the level of the hormone but also the "sign" (male or female) of the hormonal effect. Aromatase, the enzyme that converts testosterone to estradiol, is present at high levels in the ovaries but not in the testes. Differential expression of aromatase is the reason for sexual dimorphism in circulating testosterone and estrogen. Aromatase is also expressed in various regions of the brain (Figure 51–4A), and many of the effects of testosterone on neurons are thought to occur after its conversion to estrogen. Testosterone

20/01/21 2:57 PM

Figure 51–2 Sexual differentiation of the

internal genitalia. Embryos of both sexes

develop bilateral genital ridges (the gonadal Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System Müllerian duct

anlagen) that can differentiate into either testes or ovaries; Müllerian ducts, which can differentiate into oviducts, the uterus, and the upper vagina; and Wolffian ducts, which can differentiate into the epididymis, the vas deferens, and the seminal vesicles. In XY embryos, the expression of the SRY gene in the genital ridge induces differentiation of this tissue into testes and of the Wolffian ducts into the rest of the male internal genitalia, while the Müllerian ducts are resorbed. In XX embryos, the absence of SRY permits the genital ridges to develop into ovaries and the Müllerian ducts to dif -ferentiate into the rest of the female internal genitalia; in the absence of circulating testosterone, the Wolffian ducts degenerate. (Abbreviation: MIS, Müllerian inhibiting substance.) (Adapted, with permission, from Wilhelm, Palmer, and Koopman 2007.)

<!-- image -->

is also converted by the enzyme 5α-reductase into

another androgenic steroid, 5α-dihydrotestosterone

(DHT), in various target tissues, including the exter-

nal genitalia. In these tissues, DHT is responsible for induction of secondary male characteristics such as facial and body hair and growth of the prostate. Later in life, DHT is the culprit in male pattern baldness. Disorders of Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis Affect Sexual Differentiation

## As one can imagine, mutations in genes encoding enzymes involved in steroid hormone biosynthesis

have far-reaching consequences. The resulting pheno-

types dramatically illustrate both the organizational and activational effects of steroid hormones, as well as the difficulty of neatly distinguishing the two. Here, we describe three disorders (Table 51–1). The first, congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), is a genetic deficiency in the synthesis of corticosteroids by the adrenal glands that results in overproduction of

testosterone and related androgens. This condition is autosomal recessive and occurs once in 10,000 to 15,000 live births. In girls born with CAH, excess androgens

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1263


Ovary

Oviduct

Uterus

lead to some masculinization of the external genitalia,

a process called virilization. Virilization clearly reflects

the organizational roles of steroids. This condition can

be diagnosed at birth and resolved by surgical intervention. Treatment with corticosteroids reduces tes -tosterone levels, permitting these females to undergo puberty and become fertile. A second genetic disorder, 5α-reductase II deficiency, can also affect sexual differentiation. In male fetuses, 5α-reductase II is expressed at high levels in

the precursor of the external genitalia, where it converts circulating testosterone into DHT. The high local concentrations of DHT virilize the external genitalia. Clinical 5α-reductase II deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, and males present at birth with ambiguous (under-virilized) or overtly feminized external genitalia. In many instances, therefore, chromosomally male patients (XY) with this condition are mistakenly raised as females until puberty, at which time the large increase in circulating testosterone virilizes the body hair, musculature, and, most dramatically, the external genitalia. The critical role of steroid receptors in controlling sexual differentiation is well illustrated by patients

20/01/21 2:57 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior than testosterone, accounting for the greater potency of DHT. There is also a single receptor for proges- terone (progesterone receptor), whereas two genes encode receptors that bind estrogens (estrogen receptors α and β). These steroid hormone receptors are present in many tissues of the body, including the brain (Figure 51–4B). These receptor proteins are transcription factors that bind specific sites in the genome and modulate transcription of target genes. They contain sev- eral signature motifs, including a hormone-binding domain, a DNA-binding domain, and a domain that modulates the transcriptional activity of target genes (Figure 51–5A). Hormones activate the transcriptional activity by binding to the receptor. In the absence of ligand, the receptors bind to protein complexes that sequester them in the cytoplasm. Upon binding of ligand, the receptors dissociate from the complex and enter the nucleus, where they dimerize and bind to specific sequence elements in the promoter and enhancer regions of target genes, modulating their transcription (Figure 51–5B). Patients with CAIS are chromosomally XY but carry a loss-of-function allele of the X-linked androgen receptor that abolishes cellular responses to testoster-

<!-- image -->

one and DHT. Because the pathway of sex determination via SRY remains functional, these patients have testes. However, because of deficient androgen signaling, the Wolffian ducts do not develop, the testes fail to descend, and the external genitalia are feminized. In adulthood, most of these patients opt for surgical removal of the testes and hormonal supplementation appropriate for females. Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System OH

series of enzymatic reactions into progesterone and testoster-

one. Testosterone or related androgens are obligate precursors of all estrogens in the body, a conversion that is catalyzed by aromatase. The expression of 5α-reductase in target tissues converts testosterone into dihydrotestosterone, an androgen.

with a third disorder, complete androgen insensitiv-

ity syndrome (CAIS). Testosterone, estrogen, and pro-

gesterone are hydrophobic molecules that are able to

diffuse across cell membranes, enter the bloodstream, enter cells in many organs, and bind to intracellular ligand-specific receptors. The receptors for these hormones are encoded by distinct but homologous genes. A single gene encodes a receptor that binds the androgens testosterone and DHT. The androgen receptor binds DHT approximately three-fold more tightly

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1264

Generates Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors

## Sex-specific behaviors occur because the nervous system differs between males and females. These differ -

ences arise from a combination of genetic factors, such

as signaling pathways initiated by sex determination, as well as environmental factors, such as social experience. In many cases, both genetic and environmental inputs act through the steroid hormone system to sculpt the nervous system. Many instances of sexual dimorphism have been documented, including differences in the numbers and size of neurons in particular structures, differences in gene expression in various neuronal groups, and differences in the pattern and number of connections. Here, we examine a few cases in which studies in experimental animals have provided insights. In later sections, we ask whether similar

20/01/21 2:57 PM

A Aromatase distribution

Figure 51–4 Aromatase and estrogen

receptors are expressed in specific regions

of the brain.

## A. The enzyme aromatase catalyzes the conversion of testosterone into estrogen (Figure 51–3) and is expressed in discrete neuronal

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Hippocampus

populations in the brain. The distribution of aromatase-expressing neurons labeled with a reporter protein (blue) in transgenic mice is shown here in three coronal planes of the brain: in neurons in the preoptic hypothalamus (1), in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) (2), and in the medial amygdala (3). These areas contain sexually dimorphic neurons that regulate sexual behavior, aggression, and maternal behaviors. (Adapted, with permission, from Wu et al. 2009.) B. This midsagittal section of an adult rat brain shows binding of estrogen to cells in various hypothalamic regions, including the sexually

dimorphic preoptic area. Additional estrogen binding is seen in the septum, hippocampus, pituitary, and midbrain. Other, more lateral areas such as the amygdala (not shown) also contain estrogen receptors.

Corpus callosum

Table 51–1 Three Clinical Syndromes That Highlight the Role of Androgens in Masculinization in Humans

<!-- image -->

Complete androgen

insensitivity syndrome

(CAIS)

| Chromosomal sex  XY  XY  XX  Molecular basis  Nonfunctional androgen  receptor, leading to inability  to respond to circulating  androgens  Nonfunctional 5α-reductase  II, leading to deficit in con-  version of testosterone to  5α-dihydrotestosterone  (DHT) in target tissues  Defect in corticosteroid syn-  thesis, leading to increase in  circulating androgens from  the adrenals  Gonad  Testis  Testis  Ovary  Wolffian derivatives  Vestigial  Present  Absent  Müllerian derivatives  Absent  Absent  Present  External genitalia  At birth  Feminized  Variably feminized  Variably virilized  After puberty  Feminized  Masculinized  Feminized  Gender identity  Female  Female or male  Female or male  Sexual partner preference  Male  Female or male  Female or male   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1265

5α-Reductase II deficiency


<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Midbrain Cerebellum

Congenital adrenal

hyperplasia (CAH)

20/01/21 2:57 PM


Figure 51–5 Steroid hormone receptors and their

mechanism of action.

A. The canonical receptors for steroid hormones are

ligand-activated transcription factors. These receptors have an N-terminal domain, which contains a

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A Steroid hormone receptor structure

N-terminal DNA-binding

domain domain Ligand-binding domain

<!-- image -->

transcriptional transactivator domain; a central DNA-binding domain; and a C-terminal ligand-binding domain, which may contain an additional transcriptional transactivator domain. B. Sex steroid hormones are hydrophobic and enter the circulation by diffusing across the plasma membrane of steroidogenic cells in the gonads. They enter

target cells in distant tissues such as the brain by passing through the plasma membrane and bind their cognate receptors. The steroid hormone receptor typically exists in a multiprotein complex with chaperone proteins in the cytoplasm of hormone-responsive cells. Ligand-binding promotes dissociation of the receptor from the chaperone complex and translocation into the nucleus. In the nucleus, the receptor is thought to bind to hormone response elements as a homodimer to modulate transcription of target genes. (Adapted from Wierman 2007.)

B Steroid hormone pathway

Gonads Steroid hormone

<!-- image -->

mechanisms underlie sexually dimorphic behaviors in

humans.

However, before proceeding, we note that the ways Motor neurons in the SNB innervate the bulbocaver

-

nosus muscle, which plays an important part in penile

reflexes in males and vaginal movements in females.

in which chromosomal mechanisms of sex determina tion are linked to the cellular processes of sexual dif-

-In adult rats, the male SNB contains many more motor neurons than the female SNB. In addition, male SNB motor neurons are larger in size and have larger dendritic

-arbors, with a corresponding increase in the number of synapses they receive. Like the SNB motor neurons, the bulbocavernosus muscle is larger in males than females; it is completely absent in the females of some mammalian species. SNB motor neurons also innervate the levator ani muscle, which is involved in copulatory behavior and is also larger in males than females. How do these differences arise? Initially, the circuit is not sexually dimorphic. At birth, male and female rats have similar numbers of neurons in the SNB and

ferentiation in the central nervous system vary widely among species. In insects, sex differences in behavior are independent of hormonal secretion from the gonads, and instead rely exclusively on a sex determination pathway within individual neurons. This mode of sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior is particularly well understood in the fruit fly, where it has been demonstrated that the sex determination cas cade initiates expression of a transcription factor, fruitless (Fru), that specifies much of the repertoire of male sexual behaviors (Box 51–1). Erectile Function Is Controlled by a Sexually Dimorphic Circuit in the Spinal Cord

## The lumbar spinal cord of many mammals, including humans, contains a sexually dimorphic motor center, the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB).

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1266

similar numbers of fibers in the bulbocavernosus and levator ani muscles. In females, however, many motor neurons in the SNB and many fibers in the bulbocavernosus and levator ani muscles die in early postnatal life. Thus, this sexual dimorphism arises not by malespecific generation of cells, but rather by female-specific cell death (Figure 51–7A).

20/01/21 2:57 PM

Perinatal injections of testosterone or DHT can

rescue a significant number of the dying neurons and

muscle fibers in the female rat. Conversely, treatment Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


critical period lead to an irreversible reduction in the

number of SNB motor neurons. Later, androgens act

directly on SNB motor neurons to increase the extent

of male pups with an androgen receptor antagonist increases the number of dying neurons and muscle fibers. So at a deeper level, we see that the dimorphism results from male-specific preservation of motor neurons and muscle fibers that would die in the absence of hormone. Where does testosterone act to establish this struc tural dimorphism? Is it primarily a survival factor for the motor neurons, with muscle fibers dying secondar-

ily because they lose their innervation? Or does testosterone act on muscles, which then provide a trophic factor to support the survival of SNB motor neurons? This issue has been examined in rats carrying a mutation of the androgen receptor (tfm allele) that reduces binding of ligand to 10% of normal. The receptor resides on the X chromosome, so all males that carry a mutant gene on their one and only X chromosome are feminized and sterile. For female heterozygotes, the situation is more complicated. As described earlier, one of the X chromosomes is randomly inactivated in each XX female. Female heterozygotes are therefore mosaics: Some cells express a functional androgen receptor allele, others the mutated allele. Each muscle fiber has

-of their dendritic arbors. A loss of circulating testosterone, such as that occurring after castration, leads to a dramatic pruning of dendritic arbors; injection of supplemental testosterone to a castrated male rat can restore this dendritic branching pattern (Figure 51–7B). This effect persists in adulthood and is reversible, so it can be viewed as an activational influence. Thus, androgens can exert diverse effects, even on a single neuronal type. Song Production in Birds Is Controlled by Sexually Dimorphic Circuits in the Forebrain

## Several species of songbirds learn species-specific vocalizations that are used for courtship rituals and territorial marking (Chapter 55). A set of intercon-

many nuclei, so most bulbocavernosus muscle fibers in the heterozygous female express functional androgen receptors. Motor neurons have a single nucleus, however, so each neuron is either normal or receptordeficient. If androgen receptors were required in the neuron, one would expect only receptor-expressing SNB motor neurons to survive, whereas if receptors were required only in muscles, one would expect surviving motor neurons to be a mixture of wild type and mutant. In fact, the latter situation occurs, indicating that survival of SNB motor neurons does not depend on a neuron-autonomous function of the androgen recep-

tor. Rather, these neurons receive a trophic cue from the androgen-dependent bulbocavernosus and the levator ani muscles (Figure 51–7A). These cues may include the ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) or a related molecule, because mutant male mice lacking a CNTF receptor exhibit a decreased number of SNB motor neurons, typical of females. Male and female SNB motor neurons also differ in size. Androgens determine the differences in number and size of these neurons in different ways. Studies of

tfm mutants showed that androgens exert an organizational effect during early postnatal life through a direct effect on muscle. Low levels of androgens during this

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1267

nected brain nuclei controls the learning and production of birdsong (Figure 51–8A). In some songbird species, both sexes sing and the structure of the song circuit is similar in males and females. In other species, such as zebra finches and canaries, males alone sing. In these species, several song-related nuclei are significantly larger in the male than in the female. The development of sexual dimorphism in song circuitry has been studied in detail in the zebra finch. The robust nucleus of the archistriatum (RA) in the

adult male zebra finch contains five times as many neurons as the same nucleus in females. In addition, the afferent projections to RA exhibit a striking sexual dimorphism—only in males does the RA receive input from high vocal centers (HVCs) (Figure 51–8B). These sex differences in cell number and connectivity of RA are not evident until after hatching, when in females a large number of RA neurons die and in males the axons of HVC neurons enter the RA nucleus. These sexually dimorphic anatomical features are regulated by steroid hormones. When females are supplied with estrogen (or an aromatizable androgen such

as testosterone) after hatching, the number of neurons in the RA and the termination pattern in the nucleus are similar to that of the male. However, early hormone administration to young females is not sufficient to masculinize the song nuclei to a size comparable to that of adult males, nor is it sufficient to induce singing in females. To achieve these functions, female birds that receive testosterone or estradiol after hatching must also receive testosterone or dihydrotestosterone (but not estrogen) as adults. Thus, steroids play both organizational and activational roles in this system as well.

20/01/21 2:57 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Box 51–1 Genetic and Neural Control of Mating Behavior in the Fruit Fly

## In the presence of a female fruit fly, the adult male fly engages in a series of essentially stereotyped routines females. These data indicate that Fru male courtship and copulation.

that usually culminate in copulation (Figure 51–6A).

This elaborate male courtship ritual is encoded by a cascade of gene transcription within the brain and peripheral sensory organs that masculinizes the underlying neural circuitry. Sex determination in the fly does not depend on gonadal hormones as it does in vertebrates. Instead, it occurs cell autonomously throughout the body. In

other words, sexual differentiation of the brain and the rest of the body is independent of gonadal sex. The male-specific Y chromosome of fruit flies does not bear a sex-determining locus. Instead, sex is determined by the ratio of X chromosome number to autosome number (X:A). A ratio of 1 is determinative for female differentiation, whereas a ratio of 0.5 drives male differentiation. The X:A ratio sets into motion a cascade of gene transcription and alternative splicing programs that leads to the expression of sex-specific splice forms of

two genes, doublesex (dsx) and fruitless (fru). The dsx gene encodes a transcription factor that is essential for sexual differentiation of the nervous system and the rest of the body, with the sex-specific splice variants responsible for male- and female-typical development. The fru gene encodes a set of putative transcription factors that are generated by multiple promoters and alternative splicing. In males, one particular mRNA M


is required for

Conversely, transgenic female flies carrying a fru


allele exhibit male mating behavior toward wild type females, indicating that fru M is sufficient to inhibit female

sexual responses and promote male mating. Intriguingly, fru F males do not court females and, like wild type females, do not reject mating attempts by wild type males or fru M females. Similarly, fru M females M

males (or fru females) are housed together, they court each other vigorously, often forming long chains of flies attempting copulation. To build the circuitry underlying male courtship rituals, fru M appears to initiate cell-autonomous maletypical differentiation of the neurons in which it is

attempt to mate with both fru and wild type females. These data suggest that fru M may also specify sexual partner preference, which in the case of wild type males would be directed to females. In wild type females without fru M , the neural pathways are wired such that these flies exhibit sexually receptive behaviors toward males. When groups of fru F M

expressed. This leads to overt neuroanatomic dimorphism in cell number or projections of many classes of neurons (Figure 51–6B). Some neurons that express fru M are not distributed in dimorphic patterns. In these neurons, fru M may regulate the expression of particular classes of genes whose products drive a male-specific program of physiology and function. Are neurons that express fru M required for male courtship behavior? When synaptic transmission is genetically blocked in these neurons in adult males, all

tiation. These fru males therefore resemble wild type males externally. However, the loss of Fru M mals abolishes male courtship behavior directed toward

(fru ) is translated into functional proteins. In female flies, alternative splicing results in the absence of such proteins. Males carrying a genetically modified fru allele that can only be spliced in the female-specific manner (fru have essentially normal, dsx-dependent sexual differenF

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1268

F ) in these ani -components of courtship behavior are abolished. Importantly, these males continue to exhibit normal movement, flight, and other behaviors in response to visual and olfactory stimuli. These findings demonstrate that fru M appears to be expressed in a neural circuit that is essential for and dedicated to male fly courtship.

20/01/21 2:57 PM

A

<!-- image -->

A. Male flies (labeled with asterisk) engage in a stereotyped

sequence of behavioral routines that culminate in attempted copulation. The male fly orients toward the female and then

taps her with his forelegs. This is followed by wing extension in the male and a species-specific pattern of wing vibrations that is commonly referred to as the fly courtship song. If the female fly is sexually receptive, she slows down and permits the male to lick her genitalia. The female then opens her vaginal plates in order to allow the male to initiate copulation. All steps in the male mating ritual require the expression of a sex-specific splice variant of the fruitless (fru) gene. (Adapted, with permission, from Greenspan and Ferveur 2000.)

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1269

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System

Attempted copulation

fly courtship ritual. Fru expression is visualized using a fluo-

rescent reporter protein (green) in transgenic flies. Neuronal clusters that express Fru are present in comparable numbers in the central nervous system of both male and female flies. However, there are regional sex differences in Fru expression. A cluster of Fru-expressing neurons is present in the male optic lobes (in the area within the white ellipses) but absent in the corresponding regions in the female brain. The two male antennal lobe regions (areas within yellow ellipses) contain about 30 neurons each, whereas each female region has only four to five neurons. (Adapted, with permission, from Kimura et al. 2005.)


20/01/21 2:57 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

A. The spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB) is found in

B

Intact male

control the sexual differentiation of SNB neurons. (Reproduced,

with permission, from Morris, Jordan, and Breedlove 2004.

Copyright © 2004 Springer Nature.)

the male lumbar spinal cord but is greatly reduced in the female. The motor neurons of the nucleus are present in both sexes at

<!-- image -->

birth, but the lack of circulating testosterone in females leads to death of the SNB neurons and their target muscles. It is thought that testosterone in the male circulation promotes the survival of the target muscles, which express the androgen receptor. In response to testosterone, the muscles provide trophic support to the innervating SNB neurons. This muscle-derived survival factor is likely to be ciliary neurotrophic factor or a related member of the cytokine family. Thus, testosterone acts on muscle cells to

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1270

B. Dendritic branching of SNB neurons is regulated by circulating testosterone in adult male rats. In males, the dendrites arborize extensively within the spinal cord (upper

photo). The fact that the arbors are pruned in adult castrated male rats (lower photo) is evidence that this dendritic branching depends on androgens. The spinal cord is shown in transverse section, and the SNB neurons and their dendrites are labeled by a retrograde tracer injected into target muscles. (From Cooke and Woolley 2005. Reproduced, with permission from D. Sengelaub.)

20/01/21 2:58 PM
Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

A

A. The spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB) is found in

B

Intact male

control the sexual differentiation of SNB neurons. (Reproduced,

with permission, from Morris, Jordan, and Breedlove 2004.

Copyright © 2004 Springer Nature.)

the male lumbar spinal cord but is greatly reduced in the female. The motor neurons of the nucleus are present in both sexes at

<!-- image -->

birth, but the lack of circulating testosterone in females leads to death of the SNB neurons and their target muscles. It is thought that testosterone in the male circulation promotes the survival of the target muscles, which express the androgen receptor. In response to testosterone, the muscles provide trophic support to the innervating SNB neurons. This muscle-derived survival factor is likely to be ciliary neurotrophic factor or a related member of the cytokine family. Thus, testosterone acts on muscle cells to

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1270

B. Dendritic branching of SNB neurons is regulated by circulating testosterone in adult male rats. In males, the dendrites arborize extensively within the spinal cord (upper

photo). The fact that the arbors are pruned in adult castrated male rats (lower photo) is evidence that this dendritic branching depends on androgens. The spinal cord is shown in transverse section, and the SNB neurons and their dendrites are labeled by a retrograde tracer injected into target muscles. (From Cooke and Woolley 2005. Reproduced, with permission from D. Sengelaub.)

20/01/21 2:58 PM

Figure 51–8 Sexual dimorphism in the

avian song circuit.

A. Songbirds have a dedicated neural circuit

## for song production and learning, with distinct components contributing to learning or

production. Many of these components are sexually dimorphic in songbirds in which only one sex sings. For example, in zebra finches, only the male sings, and the male high vocal center (HVC), robust nucleus of the archistria -tum (RA), lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior neostriatum (LMAN), and area X are larger in volume and contain more neurons than the comparable regions in the female. (Abbreviations: DLM, medial nucleus of the dorsolateral thalamus; nXIIts, hypoglossal nucleus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Brainard and Doupe 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.) B. In the male, the axons of HVC neurons terminate on neurons in the RA nucleus, whereas in females, the axons terminate in

a zone surrounding the nucleus. The sexual dimorphism in cell number and connectivity of these regions is regulated by estrogen. (Reproduced, with permission, from Morris, Jordan, and Breedlove 2004. Copyright © 2004 Springer Nature.) C. The pattern of termination of the axons of HVC neurons in the RA nucleus varies in males and females at different ages after

hatching. (Reproduced, with permission, from Konishi and Akutagawa 1985. Copyright © 1985 Springer Nature.)

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1271

A

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


Song learning

Song learning

and production

<!-- image -->

20/01/21 2:58 PM

HVC


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Mating Behavior in Mammals Is Controlled

by a Sexually Dimorphic Neural Circuit in the

Hypothalamus

## In many mammalian species, the preoptic region of the hypothalamus and a reciprocally connected region, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), play impor-

tant roles in sexually dimorphic mating behaviors (Chapter 41; Figure 51–4). In male rodents and monkeys, these areas are activated during mating behavior; surgical lesions that ablate the preoptic region or the BNST result in deficits in male sexual behavior in male rodents and, in the case of preoptic lesions, disinhibit female-type sexual receptivity in males. Both the preoptic hypothalamus and the BNST are sexually dimorphic, containing more neurons in males compared to females. The sexually dimorphic

nucleus of the preoptic area (SDN-POA) also contains significantly more neurons in the male. A male-specific perinatal surge of testosterone promotes survival of neurons in the SDN-POA and BNST, whereas in females, these same cells gradually die off in the early postnatal period. This development is similar to that in the sexually dimorphic nuclei of the rodent spinal cord and the songbird brain, suggesting that androgen control is a common mechanism for production of sex differences in the size of neuronal populations. Curiously, the ability of brain testosterone to promote the survival of neurons is likely to be exerted via aromatization into estrogen and subsequent activation

of the estrogen receptors (see Figures 51–3 and 51–4). How then is the neonatal female brain shielded from the effects of circulating estrogen? In newborn females, there is very little estrogen in the circulation, and the small amount present is easily sequestered by binding to α-fetoprotein, a serum protein. This explains why female mice lacking α-fetoprotein exhibit male-typical behaviors and reduced female-typical sexual receptivity. In this case, then, structural sexual dimorphism does not result from differential effects of androgens and estrogens, but rather from sex differences in the level of hormone available to the target tissue. Environmental Cues Regulate Sexually

Dimorphic Behaviors

## Sex-specific behaviors are usually initiated in response to sensory cues in the environment. There are many

such cues, and different species use distinct sensory

modalities to elicit similar responses. Courtship rituals can be triggered by species-specific vocalizations, visual signals, odors, and even, in the case of weakly

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1272

electric fish, by electric discharges. Recent genetic and

molecular studies have led to significant insight into

how sensory experience controls some of these behav-

iors in rodents. Here, we discuss two examples: the regulation of partner choice by pheromones and the regulation of maternal behavior by experience during infancy. Pheromones Control Partner Choice in Mice

Many animals rely on their sense of smell to move

## about, obtain food, and avoid predators. They also

rely on pheromones—chemicals that are produced by

an animal to affect the behavior of another member of the species. In rodents, pheromones can trigger many sexually dimorphic behaviors, including mate choice and aggression. Pheromones are detected by neurons in two distinct sensory tissues in the vertebrate nose: the main olfactory epithelium (MOE) and the vomeronasal

organ (VNO) (Figure 51–9A). It is thought that sensory neurons in the MOE detect volatile odors, whereas those in the VNO detect nonvolatile chemosensory cues. Removal of the olfactory bulb, the only synaptic target of neurons in the MOE and the VNO, abolishes mating as well as aggression in mice and other rodents. These and other studies indicate an essential role for olfactory stimulation in initiating mating and fighting. Genetically engineered disruption of pheromone responsiveness in the MOE or VNO reveals that these sensory tissues have a surprisingly complex role in the

mating behavior of mice. A functional MOE is essential to trigger male sexual behavior, and an intact VNO is required for sex discrimination and directing the male to mate with females. Key to these experiments is the fact that olfactory neurons in the MOE and the VNO use different signal transduction cascades to convert olfactory input into

electrical responses. The cation channel Trpc2 appears essential for pheromone-evoked signaling in VNO neurons; it is not expressed in MOE neurons, which use a different signal transduction apparatus. Thus, mice lacking the gene trpc2 have a nonfunctional VNO and an intact MOE. Mating behavior directed to animals of the opposite sex appears unaltered in trpc2 mutant males as well as females. However, both male and female trpc2 mutants often exhibit male sexual behavior with members of either sex. For example, trpc2 mutant females mate

with females in a manner seemingly indistinguishable from wild type males, except of course the females cannot ejaculate. These and other findings suggest that the VNO is used to discriminate among sexual partners.

20/01/21 2:58 PM

A

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System

AOB

MOB

<!-- image -->

MOE

A. Odorants are detected by sensory neurons in the main olfac-

tory epithelium (MOE), which projects to the main olfactory bulb (MOB), and by neurons in the vomeronasal organ (VNO),

which projects to the accessory olfactory bulb (AOB). Many of the central connections of the MOE and VNO pathway are anatomically segregated. (Adapted, with permission, from Dulac and Wagner 2006.) B. Female mice possess the neural circuitry that can activate either male (blue) or female (red) mating behaviors. In wild type females, pheromones activate female mating behavior and

inhibit male-type mating. By contrast, in males, pheromones activate a circuitry that will initiate fights with males and mating

When the VNO is inactivated, animals can no longer

distinguish between males and females, and mutants

therefore exhibit male sexual behavior toward mem

-

bers of both sexes. Similarly, adult wild type females treated with testosterone also exhibit male sexual behavior toward females (Figure 51–9C). One implication of these studies is that female mice possess the neural circuitry for male sexual behavior (Figure 51–9B). Activation of this neural circuit is

inhibited in wild type females by sensory input from

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1273

VNO

25 50 100 500

with females. (Adapted, with permission, from Kimchi, Xu, and

C. Testosterone activates male sexual behavior in male

and female mice. The data are from a study in which the gonads of male and female mice were surgically removed in

adulthood. None of the animals exhibited male sexual behavior with wild type females following surgery. After administration of testosterone, mating behavior was restored in castrated males, and females displayed male sexual behavior. This effect was dose-dependent; at the highest dose, male and female mice exhibited comparable levels of male-type mating behavior toward wild type females. (Adapted, with permission, from Edwards and Burge 1971. Copyright © 1971 Springer Nature.)

the VNO and by the lack of testosterone. Removal

of the VNO or administration of testosterone activates

male sexual behavior in females. Male pattern mating

behavior has been observed in females of many species, indicating that the findings in mice are likely to be of general relevance. Thus, neural pathways for male sexual behavior appear to be present in both sexes. Similarly, the female-typical behavior of male rats following hypothalamic lesions suggests that the neural pathway for female sexual behavior also exists in the

20/01/21 2:58 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

male brain. In such cases, it is the differential regula-

tion of these circuits that underlies the sexually dimor-

phic expression of male and female sexual behaviors.

Early Experience Modifies Later Maternal Behavior

The preoptic area of the hypothalamus and the BNST

## are also important for another set of sexually dimorphic behaviors in females. Nursing rodents are good mothers,

building a nest for their litter, crouching over the pups to keep them warm, and returning the pups to the nest when they happen to crawl away. Surgical lesioning or experimental stimulation of the preoptic region abolishes or activates these maternal behaviors, respectively. Studies of these behaviors have shed light on variations among individual females and how these

Less frequent licking

and grooming

Mother Mother

<!-- image -->

and groom their pups at low or high frequencies, resulting

in distinct epigenetic modifications at the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) promoter. Mothers that lick and groom at high frequency raise progeny with low levels of DNA methylation at the GR promoter, resulting in higher levels of GR expression in the hippocampus. Females raised by these mothers exhibit higher frequencies of licking and grooming behavior

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1274

differences exert lifelong effects on behavior of the off-

spring. Female lab rats exhibit distinct, stable forms of

maternal care: Some lick and groom (LG) their pups

frequently (high-LG mothers), whereas others lick and groom less frequently (low-LG mothers). Female offspring of high-LG mothers display high-LG activity when they themselves become mothers compared to female offspring of low-LG mothers (Figure 51–10). Moreover, pups of high-LG mothers show less anxietylike behaviors in stressful conditions than do the pups of low-LG mothers. These results suggested that levels of licking and grooming behavior and stress responses are genetically determined. However, studies by Michael Meaney

and his colleagues provide an alternative explanation. When female rat pups are transferred from

More frequent licking

and grooming

Glucocorticoid

receptors

More frequent licking

and grooming

with their own pups. Mothers that lick and groom at low

frequency raise progeny with high DNA methylation levels

at the GR promoter and lower levels of hippocampal GR

expression. Females nursed by these mothers subsequently exhibit similar low levels of licking and grooming of their pups. Pharmacological reversal of the epigenetic modifications at the GR promoter results in a corresponding change in both GR expression and maternal behavior. (Adapted from Sapolsky 2004.)

20/01/21 2:58 PM

their mother to a foster mother at birth, their mater

-

nal behavior and stress responses as adults resemble

those of their foster mother rather than those of their

biological mother. Thus, experience in infancy can lead to lifelong behavioral patterns. Because these patterns impact maternal behavior, their influence can endure over many generations. How does brief and early experience lead to such long-lasting changes? One mechanism involves a covalent modification of the genome. Stress responses

are coordinated by glucocorticoids acting on glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus. Throughout life, tactile stimulation, including grooming, leads to transcriptional activation of the glucocorticoid receptor gene, which ultimately leads to reduced release of hypothalamic hormones that trigger stress responses. Tactile stimulation during early life also regulates the glucocorticoid receptor gene in a second way. A key site in the glucocorticoid receptor gene is methylated by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase, leading to gene inactivation. Initially, gene methylation occurs in all pups, but pups reared by high-LG mothers are selectively demethylated. Thus, in animals reared by high-LG mothers, the effects of adult experience are potentiated. This is an example of epigenetic modification by which genes can be turned on or off more or less permanently. These animals exhibit blunted behavioral responses to stressful stimuli later in life. What are the biological links between early experience and behavioral variation? A peptide hormone, oxytocin, plays a major role. Classic work showed that

oxytocin regulates provision of milk by the mother, which occurs via reflex ejection in response to suckling (milk let-down). Oxytocin is synthesized by neurons in the hypothalamus and released into the general circulation through their projections in the posterior pituitary. It elicits smooth muscle contraction in the mammary gland, resulting in milk ejection. Oxytocin release from the pituitary is controlled by suckling, which provides a sensory stimulus that is conveyed to the hypothalamus by spinal afferent nerves. Oxytocin and a related polypeptide hormone vasopressin also play important roles in regulating maternal bonding and other social behaviors (Chapter 2). In

these cases, experience appears to modulate behaviors by affecting both release of oxytocin and levels of the oxytocin receptor in specific brain areas. In both rats and voles, individual differences in the care females provide their offspring correlate with variations in oxytocin receptor level in specific brain areas. Especially noteworthy is that oxytocin receptor levels in several regions are higher in female offspring reared by high-LG mothers than in female progeny of low

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1275

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


LG-mothers. Thus, sensory stimulation may affect

activity of these polypeptide hormone systems, which

in turn regulate maternal and other social behaviors.

A Set of Core Mechanisms Underlies Many Sexual Dimorphisms in the Brain and Spinal Cord

## In the previous few sections, we described neural circuits that regulate several sexually dimorphic behaviors. Can we discern any common themes?

A variety of sexually dimorphic neural circuits, or wiring diagrams, can in principle generate sex differences in behavior (Figure 51–11). Although it is chal-

lenging to trace the chain of causality from genetic factors to dimorphic circuits to sex-specific behaviors, there are a few general possibilities. In one, a neural circuit, from sensory input to motor output, might be unique to one sex. In fact, this alternative is seldom encountered. Most behaviors are shared between the sexes, and even behaviors such as feeding, maternal retrieval of a pup by the scruff of its neck, or biting (during territorial scuffles between males) all call upon similar jaw movements. Consistent with this commonality, it appears that most sexual dimorphisms in behavior arise from sex differences in key neuronal populations within common circuits. The activity and connectivity of these populations alter behavioral output in a male- or female-typical manner. Estrogen can act not only during development but also in adults to periodically reconfigure presynaptic connectivity within a hypothalamic neural cir-

cuit, ensuring that female mice only mate when they are ovulating and fertile. These studies paint a picture of dynamic neural circuits in the female brain: Wiring diagrams are plastic and responsive to hormonal changes across the estrous cycle, which is analogous to the menstrual cycle in humans. Similarly, estrogen also exerts cycle-related effects on dendritic spine plasticity in other brain regions, although the behavioral consequences in these instances are less well understood. Another recurring theme in the developing brain is that masculinization is controlled by estrogen during the organizational phase. This control has pro-

found enduring effects on social behaviors in adult life. Testosterone (which is aromatized into estrogen) or estrogen treatment of neonatal rodent females masculinizes the brain. As adults, these females are no longer sexually receptive to males, and in fact display maletypical social interactions, albeit at reduced intensity. Providing testosterone to these females, to mimic adult levels of testosterone in males, boosts the intensity of social behaviors, including territorial aggression (the propensity of animals to fight over territory or mates),

20/01/21 2:58 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Entire circuit A B

Entire circuit

configured to generate sex differences in behaviors. Although

Sensory neurons Motor neurons Intermediary neurons Sexual dimorphism Male circuitry

(activated)

Female circuitry

(not activated)

neuronal populations embedded within an otherwise shared

neural circuit. Such sexual dimorphisms have been found at

the level of sensory neurons, motor neurons (as discussed for

it is possible to envision a neural circuit entirely exclusive to one or the other sex, most behaviors are shared between the sexes, and the current consensus is that sex differences in behavior or physiology reflect sexual dimorphisms in key

<!-- image -->

to male-typical levels. Thus, the perinatal surge of testos-

terone acts largely via aromatization into estrogens to

masculinize the brain, whereas in adult life, both tes-

tosterone and estrogen facilitate the display of maletypical social interactions (Figure 51–12A). These findings imply that male mice lacking androgen receptor exclusively in the nervous system should not only have male genitalia but also exhibit male pat-

terns of social behavior, albeit at reduced intensity. This has in fact been borne out nicely by genetic engineering studies in mice; such mutant male mice indeed appear indistinguishable externally from control males, but they exhibit male-type sexual and aggressive behaviors with diminished intensity. However, there is growing evidence that the developmental control of masculinization of the brain by estrogen has shifted during evolution such that testosterone may be the predominant masculinizing agent in primates, including humans. How do the actions of the limited number of sex hormones modulate the display of a large array of complex social interactions such as courtship vocali-

zations (similar to songbirds, many animals, including mice, vocalize as part of their mating ritual), sexual

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1276

spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus neurons), or neurons interposed between sensory and motor pathways (such as the BNST and the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area).

behavior, marking (the propensity of animals of many

species to claim territory with pheromones secreted

in bodily fluids), and aggression? As described earlier

in this chapter, sex hormones bind to cognate receptors to modulate gene expression in target cells. These steroids are available at different times, amounts, and places in the brain of the two sexes. Accordingly, sex hormone–regulated genes are expressed in sexually dimorphic patterns that are also different for different brain regions. These genes regulate differentiation and adult function of neural circuits along male- or femaletypical lines (Figure 51–12B). Experimental inactivation of such sex hormone– regulated genes reveals that individual genes influence only a subset of the sexually dimorphic social

interactions without altering the entire behavioral program of males and females. Thus, an additional emerging theme is that sex hormones control differentiation and function of neural circuits in a modular manner, with different sex hormone–regulated genes acting in distinct neuronal populations to regulate separate aspects of male- or female-typical behaviors. In short, there is no single neuronal population that governs

20/01/21 2:58 PM

Figure 51–12 Mechanisms whereby sex hormones influ-

ence development and function of the nervous system.

A. Masculinization of the nervous systems occurs in at least

two distinct steps: a developmental organizational phase largely controlled by estrogen signaling and a postpubertal

activational phase controlled by estrogen and testosterone signaling via their cognate hormone receptors to regulate gene expression. (Abbreviations: AR, androgen receptor; ER estrogen receptor; PR, progesterone receptor.) B. Histological images show sexually dimorphic expression patterns of Sytl4 mRNA in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) and Cckar in the ventromedial hypothalamus

(VMH) of adult mice. Expression of these genes is clearly different in unmanipulated males and females and dramatically altered upon experimental removal of sex hormones from the circulation following castration in adult life. Both the BNST and VMH regulate mating and aggression in the two sexes. Current thinking about how sex hormones regulate sex differences in behavior is illustrated in the diagram below. Molecular studies have identified many genes, such as Sytl4 and Cckar, whose expression is sexually dimorphic in

the adult brain and controlled by sex hormones. Many such genes, when experimentally mutated in mice via genetic engineering, regulate distinct components of sexually dimorphic behaviors but not the entire repertory of social interactions. In other words, sex hormones control sexually dimorphic behaviors in a modular genetic manner. (Reproduced, with permission, from Xu et al. 2012.)

Testosterone

Aromatase

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System

A

During

development

In adulthood

Progesterone

PR

Female Castrated male Castrated female

aggression

<!-- image -->

gender-typical behaviors; rather, the neural control of sexually dimorphic molecular or anatomical features

distinct behaviors is distributed across multiple differ-

ent neuronal populations.

This modular control of sexually dimorphic behaviors fits well with our thinking that most circuits are shared between the males and females and that sex

differences in behavior arise from key neural populations that alter circuit function in a male- or femaletypical fashion. It seems likely that neurons exhibiting

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1277

represent such key neuronal populations.

The Human Brain Is Sexually Dimorphic

Are sex differences between the brains of male and

## female mammals also present in humans, and if so,

might they be functionally important? Early studies

20/01/21 2:58 PM



Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

revealed that a few structures are markedly larger in

men. These include Onuf's nucleus in the spinal cord,

the homolog of the SNB in rodents (Figure 51–7);

the BNST, implicated in rodent mating behavior (Figure 51–4); and the interstitial nucleus of the anterior

BA

brain.  The human hypothalamus contains four small, discrete hypothalamus 3 (INAH3), related to the rodent SDN- POA discussed earlier (Figure 51–13).

Advances in high-resolution magnetic resonance

imaging (MRI) and histology have uncovered more subtle structural and molecular dimorphisms in the

neuronal clusters, INAH1 to INAH4. The photomicrographs

<!-- image -->

show these nuclei in adult male and female brains. While INAH1, INAH2, and INAH4 appear similar in men and women,

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1278



INAH3 is significantly larger in men. The section in part A is

0.8 mm anterior to the section in part B. (Abbreviations: IFR

,

infundibular recess; III, third ventricle; OC, optic chiasm; OT

,

optic tract; PVH, paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus; SO, supraoptic nucleus.) (Adapted, with permission, from Gorski 1988.)

20/01/21 2:58 PM

Posterior

Proportionally larger in the female brain

Proportionally larger in the male brain

the volume of many brain regions in adult men and women.

The volume of each region was normalized to the size of the cerebrum for both sexes. Sex differences were significant in many regions, including several cortical areas that likely mediate cognitive functions. (Adapted, with permission, from Cahill 2006. Copyright © 2006 Springer Nature.) central nervous system. For example, structures such

<!-- image -->

as the fronto-orbital cortex and several gyri—including

the precentral, superior frontal, and lingual gyri—

occupy a significantly larger volume in adult women compared to a cohort of adult men (Figure 51–14). Moreover, the frontomedial cortex, amygdala, and angular gyrus volumes are larger in men compared to women. Thus, there are likely to be many sexual dimorphisms in the human brain. Sexual Dimorphisms in Humans May Arise From Hormonal Action or Experience

## What remains unclear is how these brain dimorphisms arise and how they relate to behavior. They might arise early from the organizational effects of hormones or

later as a result of experience. Sex differences arising before or soon after birth could underlie behavioral differences, whereas those that arise later in life might be results of dimorphic experiences. Answers to these questions are fairly clear in a few cases. For example, studies of the development of neural circuits responsible for penile erection and lactation in rodents translate readily to humans. Two recent observations suggest that enduring effects of experience on behavior first studied in animals (Figure 51–10) are also relevant to humans. First,

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1279

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


as discussed in Chapter 49, children raised for lengthy

periods in orphanages with little individual care have

long-lasting defects in a variety of social behaviors.

Even years after placement in foster homes, these children have on average lower levels of oxytocin and vasopressin in their serum than children raised with biological parents. Second, people who have suffered abuse as children often grow up to be poor parents. Postmortem studies have shown that adults who had been abused as children exhibited greater promoter methylation of their glucocorticoid receptor genes than adults in control populations. Although these studies are new and require replication, they provide tantalizing hints at the biological mechanisms that underlie the lifelong effects of early parental care. Dimorphic Structures in the Brain Correlate with Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation

## In contrast to progress in mapping the biological bases of some relatively simple sexually dimorphic behaviors in people, differences in sexual partner preference and

gender identity remain poorly understood. Little progress has been made in relating sex differences in cognitive functions to structural differences in the brain, in part because the very existence of cognitive differences remains a matter of controversy; if they exist at all, they are small and represent differences in means between highly variable male and female populations. On the other hand, several lines of evidence have connected clear differences in gender identity and sexual orientation to dimorphic structures in the brain. Early insight into this issue came from observation of people with single-gene mutations that dissociate anatomical sex from gonadal and chromosomal

sex, such as CAIS, CAH, and 5α-reductase deficiency (Table 51–1). For example, girls with CAH experience an excess of testosterone during fetal life; the disorder is generally diagnosed at birth and corrected. Nevertheless, the early exposure to androgens is correlated with subsequent changes in gender-related behaviors. On average, girls with CAH tend to have toy preferences and engage in play typical of boys of equivalent age. There is also a small but significant increase in the incidence of homosexual and bisexual orientation in females treated for CAH as children, and a significant proportion of these females also express the desire to live as men, consistent with a change in gender identity. These findings suggest that early organizational effects of steroids affect gender-specific behaviors independent of chromosomal and anatomical sex. In 5α-reductase II deficiency and CAIS, many of the affected males show completely feminized

20/01/21 2:59 PM
Posterior

Proportionally larger in the female brain

Proportionally larger in the male brain

the volume of many brain regions in adult men and women.

The volume of each region was normalized to the size of the cerebrum for both sexes. Sex differences were significant in many regions, including several cortical areas that likely mediate cognitive functions. (Adapted, with permission, from Cahill 2006. Copyright © 2006 Springer Nature.) central nervous system. For example, structures such

<!-- image -->

as the fronto-orbital cortex and several gyri—including

the precentral, superior frontal, and lingual gyri—

occupy a significantly larger volume in adult women compared to a cohort of adult men (Figure 51–14). Moreover, the frontomedial cortex, amygdala, and angular gyrus volumes are larger in men compared to women. Thus, there are likely to be many sexual dimorphisms in the human brain. Sexual Dimorphisms in Humans May Arise From Hormonal Action or Experience

## What remains unclear is how these brain dimorphisms arise and how they relate to behavior. They might arise early from the organizational effects of hormones or

later as a result of experience. Sex differences arising before or soon after birth could underlie behavioral differences, whereas those that arise later in life might be results of dimorphic experiences. Answers to these questions are fairly clear in a few cases. For example, studies of the development of neural circuits responsible for penile erection and lactation in rodents translate readily to humans. Two recent observations suggest that enduring effects of experience on behavior first studied in animals (Figure 51–10) are also relevant to humans. First,

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1279

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


as discussed in Chapter 49, children raised for lengthy

periods in orphanages with little individual care have

long-lasting defects in a variety of social behaviors.

Even years after placement in foster homes, these children have on average lower levels of oxytocin and vasopressin in their serum than children raised with biological parents. Second, people who have suffered abuse as children often grow up to be poor parents. Postmortem studies have shown that adults who had been abused as children exhibited greater promoter methylation of their glucocorticoid receptor genes than adults in control populations. Although these studies are new and require replication, they provide tantalizing hints at the biological mechanisms that underlie the lifelong effects of early parental care. Dimorphic Structures in the Brain Correlate with Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation

## In contrast to progress in mapping the biological bases of some relatively simple sexually dimorphic behaviors in people, differences in sexual partner preference and

gender identity remain poorly understood. Little progress has been made in relating sex differences in cognitive functions to structural differences in the brain, in part because the very existence of cognitive differences remains a matter of controversy; if they exist at all, they are small and represent differences in means between highly variable male and female populations. On the other hand, several lines of evidence have connected clear differences in gender identity and sexual orientation to dimorphic structures in the brain. Early insight into this issue came from observation of people with single-gene mutations that dissociate anatomical sex from gonadal and chromosomal

sex, such as CAIS, CAH, and 5α-reductase deficiency (Table 51–1). For example, girls with CAH experience an excess of testosterone during fetal life; the disorder is generally diagnosed at birth and corrected. Nevertheless, the early exposure to androgens is correlated with subsequent changes in gender-related behaviors. On average, girls with CAH tend to have toy preferences and engage in play typical of boys of equivalent age. There is also a small but significant increase in the incidence of homosexual and bisexual orientation in females treated for CAH as children, and a significant proportion of these females also express the desire to live as men, consistent with a change in gender identity. These findings suggest that early organizational effects of steroids affect gender-specific behaviors independent of chromosomal and anatomical sex. In 5α-reductase II deficiency and CAIS, many of the affected males show completely feminized

20/01/21 2:59 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

external genitalia and are mistakenly raised as females

until puberty. Thereafter, their histories diverge. In

5α-reductase II deficiency, the symptoms arise from

a defect in testosterone processing largely confined to the developing external genitalia. At puberty, the large increase in circulating testosterone virilizes the body hair, musculature, and most dramatically, the external genitalia. At this stage, many but not all patients choose to adopt a male gender. In CAIS, in contrast, defects arise from a body-wide defect in the androgen receptor. These patients commonly seek medical advice after they fail to menstruate at puberty. Concordant with their feminized external phenotype, most CAIS

Heterosexual

men Heterosexual women patients express a female gender identity and a sexual preference for men. They opt for surgical removal of the testes and hormonal supplementation appropriate for females. What accounts for the different outcomes? Among many possibilities, one is that the dramatic change in behavior in 5α-reductase II patients at puberty results from the effects of testosterone acting on the brain. In CAIS patients, these effects do not occur because androgen receptors are absent from the brain. Clearly, however, this explanation does not rule out social and cultural upbringing as important factors in determining gender identity and sexual orientation. Homosexual Homosexual men women

<!-- image -->

A

A. Positron emission tomography imaging was used to iden-

tify brain regions that were activated when subjects sniffed androstadienone (AND) or estratetraenol (EST) compared to

nonodorous air. AND activated several hypothalamic centers in the brains of heterosexual women but not men, whereas EST activated several hypothalamic centers in heterosexual males but not females. Patterns of activation in the hypothalamus of homosexual men were similar to those of heterosexual women in response to AND, whereas similar patterns of activation were found in heterosexual men and homosexual women in response to EST. The color calibration on the right shows the

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1280






maximal activation for each condition. (Adapted, with permis-

sion, from Berglund, Lindstrom, and Savic 2006; Savic, Berglund, and Lindstrom 2005.) B. Heterosexual and homosexual subjects were scanned while breathing unscented air, and a measure of covariance was used to estimate connectivity among regions. In het-

erosexual women and homosexual men, the left amygdala was strongly connected to the right amygdala, whereas connectivity remained local in heterosexual men and homosexual women. (Adapted, with permission, from Savic and Lindstrom 2008.)

20/01/21 2:59 PM

A second set of studies probing the biology of

sexual orientation assessed responses to pheromones.

Pheromone perception in humans is quite different

from that of mice and is likely a less important sense. Humans do not have a functional VNO, and most of the genes implicated in pheromone reception in the mouse VNO, such as trpc2 and those encoding VNO receptors, are absent or nonfunctional in the human genome. To the extent that humans do sense pheromones, they appear to use the main olfactory epithelium and bulb. Chemicals that appear to be human pheromones include androstadienone (AND), an odorous androgenic metabolite, and estratetraenol (EST), an odorous estrogenic metabolite. AND is present at 10-fold higher concentrations in male sweat compared to female sweat, whereas EST is present in the urine of pregnant women. Both compounds can produce sexual arousal—AND in heterosexual women and EST in heterosexual men—even at concentrations so low that there is no conscious olfactory perception. Brain areas activated by AND and EST have been identified by positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. When AND is presented, certain hypothalamic

Female
heterosexual
Male-to-female
transsexual

Figure 51–16 Sexual dimorphism in the bed nucleus of the

stria terminalis (BNST) in humans.  The nucleus has signifi-

)



<!-- image -->

cantly more neurons in men compared to women regardless

-of male sexual orientation. Similar to women, male-to-female transsexuals have fewer neurons than men. In the one femaleto-male transsexual brain available for postmortem analysis (not shown in the bar graph), the number of neurons is well within the normal range for men. (Adapted, with permission, from Kruijver et al. 2000.) As is the case with the sexual dimorphism of the mouse BNST discussed earlier, hormonal influences

are also thought to underlie the dimorphism of the

-human BNST. If prenatal influences do lead to dissociation of sex from gender, are those influences genetic? Other than the rare syndromes described earlier, attempts to find

-genetic bases for sexual orientation or gender identity have not been productive. Claimed genetic contributions are small and claims of associations with specific genomic loci have not been replicated. Thus, while the current weight of evidence favors some contribution of early, even prenatal, factors in these processes, their cause and relative importance remain unknown. Highlights

nuclei are activated in heterosexual women but not het erosexual men, whereas when EST is presented, adjacent regions containing clusters of nuclei are activated in men but not in women (Figure 51–15A). In homosexual men and women, there is a reversal of hypothalamic activation: AND but not EST activates hypothalamic centers in homosexual men, and conversely, EST but not AND activates those areas in lesbian women. Het erosexual and homosexual brains therefore appear to process olfactory sensory information in different ways. Do sexually dimorphic structures in homosexual brains correlate with anatomical sex or sexual orien tation? Imaging studies have provided support for

the view that the brains of homosexual men resemble those of heterosexual woman and that the brains of homosexual women resemble those of heterosexual men (Figure 51–15B). Moreover, the volume of the sexually dimorphic BNST is small in male-to-female transsexuals compared to men, whereas female-tomale transsexuals appear to have a larger BNST compared to women (Figure 51–16). It is not clear, however, whether the structural dimorphism in these individuals is a consequence or a cause of gender identity or sexual orientation. The male mouse counterpart of the human BNST plays a critical role in recognizing the sex of other mice and guides subsequent social interactions, such as

aggression with males and mating with females. Thus, a region linked to gender identity in the human brain plays an important role in sex recognition in rodents.

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1281

1. In humans and many other mammals, the sex

determination pathway directs differentiation

of the bipotential gonad into testes in males

- and ovaries in females. The SRY gene on the Y chromosome directs the gonad to form testes, whereas the absence of SRY enables the gonad to differentiate into ovaries. 2. Sex steroid hormones produced by the gonads— testosterone by testes and estrogens, and progesterone by ovaries—drive sexual differentiation of
- both the nervous system and the rest of the body.

20/01/21 2:59 PM

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System





3.

Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Sex hormones act early during a critical window

in development to irreversibly organize neural

substrates for behavior in a sexually dimorphic

- manner, whereas in adult life, these hormones act acutely and reversibly to activate sex-typical physiological and behavioral responses. 4. During the critical window, testes produce a transient surge of testosterone that masculinizes the developing bipotential nervous system.
- By contrast, the ovaries are quiescent during this period, and it is thought that the absence of sex hormones enables the nervous system in this period to differentiate along a female-typical pathway. 5. Many of the actions of testosterone that masculinize the nervous system occur following its conversion to estrogen locally at the site of action.
- There is evidence to suggest that in humans and other primates testosterone also acts directly via its cognate hormone receptor to effect masculinization of the neural substrates of behavior. 6. Sex hormones control sexual differentiation of neural pathways by utilizing cellular processes such as apoptosis, neurite extension, and syn-
- apse formation that are employed widely during other developmental events. 7. Sex hormones bind to cognate hormone receptors that modulate gene expression. Such genes in turn regulate the cellular processes that result
- in sex differences in neuronal number, connectivity, and physiology. 8. Many neuronal populations that are sexually dimorphic by morphological and other criteria have been identified in the vertebrate brain over
- the past few decades. Functional studies show that these regions influence some, but not all, sexually dimorphic behaviors. 9. Recent molecular studies have identified many sex hormone–regulated genes whose expression patterns are sexually dimorphic. These genes as
- well as the neurons they are expressed in regulate sexually dimorphic social behaviors in a modular manner. In other words, individual genes and the neuronal populations that express them modulate one or a few sexually dimorphic behaviors so that the control of these behaviors is distributed among many different neuronal groups. 10. Such sexually dimorphic neuronal populations are likely embedded within neural circuits found in both sexes, and they are thought to guide
- behavior along male- or female-typical patterns. 11. Both sensory stimuli and past experience profoundly regulate the display of sexually

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1282

dimorphic behaviors. In some cases, the influ-

ence of past experience can extend across the life

span of the animal.

12. Pheromones guide choice of sexual partner in rodents. There is evidence from imaging studies that men and women may also show sexually
2. dimorphic neural responses to male and female pheromones and that these responses can align with sexual orientation; in these cases, however, it is unclear if the neural responses are learned responses based on past experience. 13. There are many sex differences between the brains of men and women, and in some instances, these sex differences align with gender in adult
3. life rather than gender assigned at birth. In these cases, it is not clear whether the sex differences causally reflect gender identity or are a result of it. These issues are difficult to disentangle at present.

Nirao M. Shah

Joshua R. Sanes

Selected Reading

Arnold AP. 2004. Sex chromosomes and brain gender. Nat

Rev Neurosci 5:701–708.

Bayless DW, Shah NM. 2016. Genetic dissection of neural

- circuits underlying sexually dimorphic social behaviours. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371:20150109.
- Byne W. 2006. Developmental endocrine influences on gender identity: implications for management of disorders of sex development. Mt Sinai J Med 73:950–959.
- Cahill L. 2006. Why sex matters for neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:477–484. Curley JP, Jensen CL, Mashoodh R, Champagne FA. 2010.
- Social influences on neurobiology and behavior: epigenetic effects during development. Psychoneuroendocri-
- nology 36:352–371. Dulac C, Wagner S. 2006. Genetic analysis of brain circuits underlying pheromone signaling. Annu Rev Genet 40:449–467.
- Hines M. 2006. Prenatal testosterone and gender-related behavior. Eur J Endocrinol 155:S115–S121. Kohl J, Dulac C. 2018. Neural control of parental behaviors.
- Curr Opin Neurobiol 49:116–122. Morris JA, Jordan CL, Breedlove SM. 2004. Sexual differen-
- tiation of the vertebrate nervous system. Nat Neurosci 7:1034–1039.

20/01/21 2:59 PM

Swaab DF. 2004. Sexual differentiation of the human brain:

relevance for gender identity, transsexualism and sexual

orientation. Gynecol Endocrinol 19:301–312.

- Wilhelm D, Palmer S, Koopman P. 2007. Sex determination and gonadal development in mammals. Physiol Rev 87:1–28. Yang CF, Shah NM. 2014. Representing sex in the brain, one
- module at a time. Neuron 82:261–278.
- References Bakker J, De Mees C, Douhard Q, et al. 2006. Alpha-fetoprotein

protects the developing female mouse brain from mascu-

linization and defeminization by estrogens. Nat Neurosci

- 9:220–226. Bayless DW, Yang T, Mason MM, et al. 2019. Limbic neurons shape sex recognition and social behavior in sexually naïve males. Cell 176:1190–1205.
- Berglund H, Lindstrom P, Savic I. 2006. Brain response to putative pheromones in lesbian women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:8269–8274.
- Brainard MS, Doupe AJ. 2002. What songbirds teach us about learning. Nature 417:351–358. Byne W, Lasco MS, Kemether E, et al. 2000. The interstitial
- nuclei of the human anterior hypothalamus: an investigation of sexual variation in volume and cell size, number
- and density. Brain Res 856:254–258. Cohen-Kettenis PT. 2005. Gender change in 46, XY persons with 5α-reductase-2 deficiency and 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency. Arch Sex Behav 34:399–410.
- Cooke BM, Woolley CS. 2005. Gonadal hormone modulation of dendrites in the mammalian CNS. J Neurobiol 64: 34–46.
- Demir E, Dickson BJ. 2005. Fruitless splicing specifies male courtship behavior in Drosophila. Cell 121:785–794. Edwards DA, Burge KG. 1971. Early androgen treatment and
- male and female sexual behavior in mice. Horm Behav 2:49–58.
- Forger NG, de Vries GJ. 2010. Cell death and sexual differentiation of behavior: worms, flies, and mammals. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20:776–783.
- Goldstein LA, Kurz EM, Sengelaub DR. 1990. Androgen regulation of dendritic growth and retraction in the development of a sexually dimorphic spinal nucleus. J Neurosci
- 10:935–946. Gorski RA. 1988. Hormone-induced sex differences in hypothalamic structure. Bull Tokyo Metropol Inst Neurosci 16 (Suppl 3):67–90.
- Gorski RA. 1988. Sexual differentiation of the brain: mechanisms and implications for neuroscience. In: SS Easter Jr, KF Barald, BM Carlson (eds). From Message to
- Mind: Directions in Developmental Neurobiology, pp. 256–271. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. Gorski RA, Harlan RE, Jacobsen CD, Shryne JE, Southam AM. 1980. Evidence for the existence of a sexually dimorphic nucleus in the preoptic area of the rat. J Comp Neurol
- 193:529–539. Greenspan RJ, Ferveur JF. 2000. Courtship in Drosophila Annu Rev Genet 34:205–232.

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1283

Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


Inoue S, Yang R, Tantry A, et al. 2019. Periodic remodeling in

a neural circuit governs timing of female sexual behavior.

Cell 179:1393–1408.

- Juntti SA, Tollkuhn J, Wu MV, et al. 2010. The androgen receptor governs the execution, but not programming, of male sexual and territorial behaviors. Neuron 66:260–272.
- Kimchi T, Xu J, Dulac C. 2007. A functional circuit underlying male sexual behavior in the female mouse brain. Nature 448:1009–1014.
- Kimura K, Ote M, Tazawa T, Yamamoto D. 2005. Fruitless specifies sexually dimorphic neural circuitry in the Dros -ophila brain. Nature 438:229–233.
- Kohl J, Babayan BM, Rubinstein ND, et al. 2018. Functional circuit architecture underlying parental behaviour. Nature 556:326–331.
- Konishi M, Akutagawa E. 1985. Neuronal growth, atrophy and death in a sexually dimorphic song nucleus in the zebra finch brain. Nature 315:145–147.
- Koopman P, Gubbay J, Vivian N, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R. 1991. Male development of chromosomally female mice transgenic for Sry. Nature 351:117–121.
- Kruijver FP, Zhou JN, Pool CW, Hofman MA, Gooren LJ, Swaab DF. 2000. Male-to-female transsexuals have female neuron numbers in a limbic nucleus. J Clin Endocrinol
- Metab 85:2034–2041. Långström N, Rahman Q, Carlström E, Lichtenstein P. 2010. Genetic and environmental effects on same-sex sexual behavior: a population study of twins in Sweden. Arch
- Sex Behav 39:75–80. Lee H, Kim DW, Remedios R, et al. 2014. Scalable control of mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. Nature 509:627–632.
- LeVay S. 1991. A difference in hypothalamic structure between heterosexual and homosexual men. Science 253:1034–1037.
- Leypold BG, Yu CR, Leinders-Zufall T, Kim MM, Zufall F, Axel R. 2002. Altered sexual and social behaviors in trp2 mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:6376–6381.
- Liu YC, Salamone JD, Sachs BD. 1997. Lesions in medial preoptic area and bed nucleus of stria terminalis: differential effects on copulatory behavior and noncontact erection in
- male rats. J Neurosci 17:5245–5253. Mandiyan VS, Coats JK, Shah NM. 2005. Deficits in sexual and aggressive behaviors in Cnga2 mutant mice. Nat Neurosci 8:1660–1662.
- Manoli DS, Foss M, Villella A, Taylor BJ, Hall JC, Baker BS. 2005. Male-specific fruitless specifies the neural substrates of Drosophila courtship behaviour. Nature 436:395–400.
- McCarthy MM, Arnold AP. 2011. Reframing sexual differentiation of the brain. Nat Neurosci 14:677–683. McGowan PO, Sasaki A, D'Alessio AC, et al. 2009. Epigenetic
- regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with childhood abuse. Nat Neurosci 12:342–348.
- Nottebohm F, Arnold AP. 1976. Sexual dimorphism in vocal control areas of the songbird brain. Science 194:211–213. Ohno S, Geller LN, Lai EV. 1974. TFM mutation and mascu-
- . linization versus feminization of the mouse central nerv ous system. Cell 3:235–242.

-

20/01/21 2:59 PM


Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior

Sapolsky RM. 2004. Mothering style and methylation. Nat

Neurosci 7:791–792.

Savic I, Berglund H, Gulyas B, Roland P. 2001. Smelling of odor-

- ous sex hormone-like compounds causes sex-differentiated hypothalamic activations in humans. Neuron 31:661–668.
- Savic I, Berglund H, Lindstrom P. 2005. Brain response to putative pheromones in homosexual men. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:7356–7361.
- Savic I, Lindstrom P. 2008. PET and MRI show differences in cerebral asymmetry and functional connectivity between homo- and heterosexual subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 105:9403–9408. Sekido R, Lovell-Badge R. 2009. Sex determination and SRY: down to a wink and a nudge? Trends Genet 25:19–29. Shah NM, Pisapia DJ, Maniatis S, Mendelsohn MM, Nemes
- A, Axel R. 2004. Visualizing sexual dimorphism in the brain. Neuron 43:313–319.
- Stockinger P, Kvitsiani D, Rotkopf S, Tirian L, Dickson BJ. 2005. Neural circuitry that governs Drosophila male courtship behavior. Cell 121:795–807.
- Stowers L, Holy TE, Meister M, Dulac C, Koentges G. 2002. Loss of sex discrimination and male-male aggression in mice deficient for TRP2. Science 295:1493–1500.
- Unger EK, Burke KJ Jr, Yang CF, Bender KJ, Fuller PM, Shah NM. 2015. Medial amygdalar aromatase neurons regulate aggression in both sexes. Cell Rep 10:453–462.
- Weaver IC, Cervoni N, Champagne FA, et al. 2004. Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior. Nat Neurosci 7:847–854.

Kandel-Ch51\_1260-1284.indd 1284

Wei YC, Wang SR, Jiao ZL, et al. 2018. Medial preoptic area in

mice is capable of mediating sexually dimorphic behav-

iors regardless of gender. Nat Commun 9:279.

- Wierman ME. 2007. Sex steroid effects at target tissues: mechanisms of action. Adv Physiol Educ 31:26–33. Wu MV, Manoli DS, Fraser EJ, et al. 2009. Estrogen mascu-
- linizes neural pathways and sex-specific behaviors. Cell 139:61–72.
- Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. 2014. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic area govern parental behaviour. Nature 509:325–330.
- Xu X, Coats JK, Yang CF, et al. 2012. Modular genetic control of sexually dimorphic behaviors. Cell 148:596–607. Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, et al. 2013. Sexually dimor-
- phic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus govern mating in both sexes and aggression in males. Cell
- 153:896–909. Yang T, Yang CF, Chizari MD, et al. 2017. Social control of hypothalamus-mediated male aggression. Neuron 95:955–970.
- Zhang J, Webb DM. 2003. Evolutionary deterioration of the vomeronasal pheromone transduction pathway in catarrhine primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:8337–8341.
- Zhang TY, Meaney MJ. 2010. Epigenetics and the environmental regulation of the genome and its function. Annu Rev Psychol 61:439–466.

20/01/21 2:59 PM

Part VIII

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1285

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1286

Preceding Page

Tingarri Men and Initiates at Marabindinya. In this painting by the Aboriginal Australian

artist, Anatjari Tjampitjinpa, Tingarri instructors are depicted as concentric circles and

their young initiates are shown as horseshoe shapes along the boundaries. The back-

ground of the painting depicts the sandhill country of the central Australian desert. Such symbolic representations recall the neural representations of episodic memories, consisting of events taking place in space and time, encoded in the firing of grid cells and place cells in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, respectively. (© Estate of the artist licensed by Aboriginal Artists Agency Ltd.)

18/01/21 6:38 PM


<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1287

Learning, Memory, Language and

## Cognition


otor and sensory functions take up less than one-half

of the cerebral cortex in humans. The rest of the cortex is

occupied by the association areas, which coordinate events

arising in the motor and sensory centers. Three association areas— the prefrontal, parietal-temporal-occipital, and limbic—are involved in cognitive behavior: speaking, thinking, feeling, perceiving, planning skilled movements, learning, memory, decision-making, and consciousness. Most of the early evidence relating cognitive functions to the association areas came from clinical studies of brain-damaged patients. Thus, the study of language in patients with aphasia yielded impor-

tant information about how human mental processes are distributed in the two hemispheres of the brain and how they develop. More refined analyses have come from human imaging studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and other methods. Deeper insights into the neural circuitry and cellular mechanisms giving rise to cognitive processes have come from electrophysiological recordings and genetic-based manipulations, including cell type–

specific gene deletions and cell type–specific optogenetic excitation or inhibition in experimental animals, particularly in rodents. Such studies can evaluate the relative contribution of specific genes, neurons, and synaptic connections to specific types of behavior. So far in this book, we have considered neural mechanisms associated with basic functions of the brain, including primary sensory perception, movement, and homeostatic control. In this part and the

next, we begin to consider the more complex, higher-order brain functions mentioned earlier, the realm of cognitive neural science. The aim of this merger of neurophysiology, anatomy, developmental biology, cell and molecular biology, theory, and cognitive psychology is to ultimately provide an understanding of the neural mechanisms of the mind. Until the latter part of the 20th century, the study of higher mental function was approached through behavioral observations gleaned from brain-damaged patients and animals with experimen-

tal lesions. In the first part of the 20th century, to avoid untestable

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1288

concepts and hypotheses, psychology became rigidly concerned

with behaviors defined strictly in terms of observable stimuli and

responses. Orthodox behaviorists thought it unproductive to deal

with consciousness, feeling, attention, or even motivation. By concentrating only on observable actions, behaviorists asked: What can an organism do, and how does it do it? Indeed, careful quantitative analysis of stimuli and responses has contributed greatly to our understanding of the acquisition and use of "implicit" knowledge of perceptual and motor skills. However, humans and other higher animals also have "explicit" knowledge of facts and events. They have knowledge of space, rules, and relations—what Edward Tolman termed cognitive maps. Animals can choose a newly available route to a goal without ever learning the sensory-response association, and humans can reason deliberatively from what they know to imagine something unknown. Indeed, that is what makes neural science possible—in fact, all of science and the humanities. Thus, we also need to ask: What does the animal know about the world, and how does it come to know it? How is that knowledge represented in the brain? Does explicit knowledge differ from implicit

knowledge? And how can such knowledge be communicated to others and enable us to make rational decisions based on past experience? Much, perhaps most, knowledge is unconscious a great deal of the time. We need to know the nature of the unconscious processes, the systems that mediate them, and their influence on the nature of conscious mental activity. Finally, we need to know about the highest realms of conscious knowledge, the knowledge of oneself as an individual, a thinking and feeling human being. The modern effort to understand the neural mechanisms of higher mental functions began at the end of the 19th century when Pierre Broca and Carl Wernicke discovered regions of the cerebral

cortex responsible for the production and comprehension of language. Throughout the 20th century, studies of patients with brain damage resulting from accidents, war, and disease led to an expansion of knowledge of the roles of specific brain areas responsible for cognitive functions, including attention, intention (planning), reasoning, and learning and memory. However, it was only in the past 20 to 30 years, based in part on new technological approaches, that our understanding of cognitive processes advanced from anatomical localization to an understanding of how neural activity in specific brain regions underlies such processes. In Part VIII, we explore such questions of cognitive brain science. Chapter 52 introduces basic mechanisms of human learning and memory, focusing on the use of fMRI and behavioral studies to

elucidate the role of different brain regions in implicit and explicit memory. In Chapter 53, we discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for implicit memory storage, focusing on studies in invertebrates and vertebrates that have elucidated the role of synaptic plasticity in implicit memory storage. In Chapter 54, we

18/01/21 6:38 PM
Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1288

concepts and hypotheses, psychology became rigidly concerned

with behaviors defined strictly in terms of observable stimuli and

responses. Orthodox behaviorists thought it unproductive to deal

with consciousness, feeling, attention, or even motivation. By concentrating only on observable actions, behaviorists asked: What can an organism do, and how does it do it? Indeed, careful quantitative analysis of stimuli and responses has contributed greatly to our understanding of the acquisition and use of "implicit" knowledge of perceptual and motor skills. However, humans and other higher animals also have "explicit" knowledge of facts and events. They have knowledge of space, rules, and relations—what Edward Tolman termed cognitive maps. Animals can choose a newly available route to a goal without ever learning the sensory-response association, and humans can reason deliberatively from what they know to imagine something unknown. Indeed, that is what makes neural science possible—in fact, all of science and the humanities. Thus, we also need to ask: What does the animal know about the world, and how does it come to know it? How is that knowledge represented in the brain? Does explicit knowledge differ from implicit

knowledge? And how can such knowledge be communicated to others and enable us to make rational decisions based on past experience? Much, perhaps most, knowledge is unconscious a great deal of the time. We need to know the nature of the unconscious processes, the systems that mediate them, and their influence on the nature of conscious mental activity. Finally, we need to know about the highest realms of conscious knowledge, the knowledge of oneself as an individual, a thinking and feeling human being. The modern effort to understand the neural mechanisms of higher mental functions began at the end of the 19th century when Pierre Broca and Carl Wernicke discovered regions of the cerebral

cortex responsible for the production and comprehension of language. Throughout the 20th century, studies of patients with brain damage resulting from accidents, war, and disease led to an expansion of knowledge of the roles of specific brain areas responsible for cognitive functions, including attention, intention (planning), reasoning, and learning and memory. However, it was only in the past 20 to 30 years, based in part on new technological approaches, that our understanding of cognitive processes advanced from anatomical localization to an understanding of how neural activity in specific brain regions underlies such processes. In Part VIII, we explore such questions of cognitive brain science. Chapter 52 introduces basic mechanisms of human learning and memory, focusing on the use of fMRI and behavioral studies to

elucidate the role of different brain regions in implicit and explicit memory. In Chapter 53, we discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for implicit memory storage, focusing on studies in invertebrates and vertebrates that have elucidated the role of synaptic plasticity in implicit memory storage. In Chapter 54, we

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1289

expand on the theme of synaptic plasticity, this time for the storage of

explicit memory by the hippocampus and related brain regions. We

further consider how the synaptic connectivity between the entorhi-

nal cortex and hippocampus enables us to perceive and remember our spatial location in a given environment. Next, in Chapter 55, we focus on the neural mechanisms underlying language, a uniquely human function that enables us to communicate our store of knowl -edge to others, including brain circuits necessary for speaking and perceiving the spoken word. Finally, in Chapter 56, we examine how the brain enables us to use our knowledge to make rational decisions. Viewed through the lens of decision-making, the distinction between the apparently separate processes of knowledge and knowhow can be seen as a unified function, one that provides a basis for understanding how consciousness may emerge from brain activity. Achieving a full understanding of the neural mechanisms that enable us to maintain a rich set of memories of our past experiences over a lifetime, to communicate those memories to others, and to use them to make informed, conscious decisions is perhaps one of the most daunting challenges in all of science. Part Editors: Eric R. Kandel and Steven A. Siegelbaum

Part VIII

Chapter 52

Learning and Memory

| Chapter 53  Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage  and the Biological Basis of Individuality  Chapter 54  The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of  Explicit Memory Storage  Chapter 55  Language  Chapter 56  Decision-Making and Consciousness   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1290


18/01/21 6:38 PM


Learning and Memory

Short-Term and Long-Term Memory Involve

Different Neural Systems

Short-Term Memory Maintains Transient Representations

## of Information Relevant to Immediate Goals Information Stored in Short-Term Memory Is Selectively

Transferred to Long-Term Memory The Medial Temporal Lobe Is Critical for Episodic

Long-Term Memory Episodic Memory Processing Involves Encoding, Storage,

## Retrieval, and Consolidation Episodic Memory Involves Interactions Between the

Medial Temporal Lobe and Association Cortices Episodic Memory Contributes to Imagination and

Goal-Directed Behavior The Hippocampus Supports Episodic Memory by

Building Relational Associations Implicit Memory Supports a Range of Behaviors

in Humans and Animals Different Forms of Implicit Memory Involve Different

## Neural Circuits Implicit Memory Can Be Associative

or Nonassociative Operant Conditioning Involves Associating a Specific

Behavior With a Reinforcing Event Associative Learning Is Constrained by the Biology of

the Organism Errors and Imperfections in Memory Shed Light on Normal

Memory Processes Highlights

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1291


n his masterful novel One Hundred Years of

Solitude, Gabriel Garcia Márquez describes a strange

plague that invades a tiny village and robs people

of their memories. The villagers first lose personal recollections, then the names and functions of common objects. To combat the plague, one man places written labels on every object in his home. But he soon realizes the futility of this strategy, because the plague eventually destroys even his knowledge of words and letters. This fictional incident reminds us of how important learning and memory are in everyday life. Learning refers to a change in behavior that results from

acquiring knowledge about the world, and memory refers to the processes by which that knowledge is encoded, stored, and later retrieved. Marquez's story challenges us to imagine life without the ability to learn and remember. We would forget people and places we once knew, and no longer be able to use and understand language or execute motor skills we had once learned; we would not recall the happiest or saddest moments of our lives and would even lose our sense of personal identity. Learning and memory are essential to the full functioning and independent survival of people and animals. In 1861, Pierre Paul Broca discovered that damage to the posterior portion of the left frontal lobe (Broca's area) produces a specific deficit in language. Soon

thereafter, it became clear that other mental functions, such as perception and voluntary movement, are also mediated by discrete parts of the brain (Chapter 1). This naturally led to the question: Are there discrete neural systems concerned with memory? If so, is there a "memory center," or is memory processing widely distributed throughout the brain?

18/01/21 6:38 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Contrary to the prevalent view that cognitive func-

tions are localized in the brain, many students of learn-

ing doubted that memory is localized. In fact, until

the middle of the 20th century, many psychologists doubted that memory is a discrete function, independent of perception, language, or movement. One reason for the persistent doubt is that memory storage involves many different parts of the brain. We now appreciate, however, that these regions are not all equally important. There are several fundamentally different types of memory, and certain regions of the brain are much more important for encoding some types of memory than for others. During the past several decades, researchers have made significant progress in the analysis and understanding of learning and memory. In this chapter, we

focus on studies of normal human memory behavior, its perturbations following brain lesions due to injury or surgery, and measurements of brain activity during learning and memory recall using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and extracellular electrophysiological recordings. These studies have yielded three major insights. First, there are several forms of learning and memory. Each form of learning and memory has distinctive cognitive and computational properties and is sup-

ported by different brain systems. Second, memory involves encoding, storage, retrieval, and consolidation. Finally, imperfections and errors in remembering can provide clues about the nature and function of learning and memory and the fundamental role that memory plays in guiding behavior and planning for the future. Memory can be classified along two dimensions: (1) the time course of storage and (2) the nature of the information stored. In this chapter, we consider the time

course of storage. In the next two chapters, we focus on the cellular, molecular, and circuit-based mechanisms of different forms of learning and memory, based largely on studies of animal models. Short-Term and Long-Term Memory Involve

Different Neural Systems

## Short-Term Memory Maintains Transient Representations of Information Relevant to

Immediate Goals

## When we reflect on the nature of memory, we usually think of the long-term memory that William James

referred to as "memory proper" or "secondary memory."

That is, we think of memory as "the knowledge of a

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1292

former state of mind after it has already once dropped

from consciousness." This knowledge depends on the

formation of a memory trace that is durable, in which

the representation persists even when its content has been out of conscious awareness for a long period. Not all forms of memory, however, constitute "former states of mind." In fact, the ability to store information depends on a form of short-term memory, called

working memory, which maintains current, albeit transient, representations of goal-relevant knowledge. In humans, working memory consists of at least two subsystems––one for verbal information and another for visuospatial information. The functioning of these two subsystems is coordinated by a third system called the executive control processes. Executive control processes are thought to allocate attentional resources to the verbal and visuospatial subsystems and to monitor, manipulate, and update stored representations. We use the verbal subsystem when we attempt to keep speech-based (phonological) information in conscious awareness, as when we mentally rehearse

a password before entering it. The verbal subsystem consists of two interactive components: a store that represents phonological knowledge and a rehearsal mechanism that keeps these representations active while we need them. Phonological storage depends on posterior parietal cortices, and rehearsal partially depends on articulatory processes in Broca's area. The visuospatial subsystem of working memory retains mental images of visual objects and of the location of objects in space. The rehearsal of spatial and

object information is thought to involve modulation of this information in the parietal, inferior temporal, and occipital cortices by the frontal and premotor cortices. Single-cell recordings in nonhuman primates indicate that, over a period of seconds, some prefrontal neurons maintain spatial representations, others

maintain object representations, and still others represent the integration of spatial and object knowledge. Although neurons concerned with working memory of objects tend to lie in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and those concerned with spatial knowledge tend to lie in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, all three classes of neurons are found in both prefrontal subregions (Figure 52–1). Thus, working memory involves activation of representations of information stored in specialized cortical regions that vary based on the content of the

information, as well as activation of general control mechanisms in prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal control signals in working memory are further dependent on interaction with the striatum and ascending dopaminergic inputs from the midbrain.

18/01/21 6:38 PM

A

<!-- image -->

Miller 1998.)

A. The role of prefrontal cortex in maintaining information in working memory is often assessed in monkeys using electrophysiological methods in conjunction with a delayed-match-to-

sample (DMS) task. In this type of task, each trial begins when the monkey grabs a response lever and visually fixates a small target at the center of a computer screen. An initial visual stimulus (the sample) is briefly presented and must be held in working memory until the next stimulus (the match) appears. In the task illustrated here, the monkey was required to remember the sample ("what") and its location ("where") and release the lever only in response to stimuli that matched on both dimensions.

Information Stored in Short-Term Memory Is

Selectively Transferred to Long-Term Memory

## In the mid-1950s, startling new evidence about the neural basis of long-term memory emerged from the study

of patients who had undergone bilateral removal of the

hippocampus and neighboring regions in the medial

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1293


Match

Object

nonmatch

Location

nonmatch

and represent responses to the type of stimulus (what), the

location (where), and the integration of the two (what and where). As shown, at left is the activity of a prefrontal neuron in response to a preferred object (to which the neuron responds robustly) and to a nonpreferred object (to which the neuron responds minimally). Activity is robust both when the monkey looks at the preferred object (sample) and during the delay. In the sketch at right, the symbols represent recording sites where neurons maintained each type of information (what, where, and what and where). Typically, several types of neurons were found at one site; hence, many symbols overlap and some symbols indicate more than one neuron.

temporal lobe as treatment for epilepsy. The first and

best-studied case was a patient called H.M. studied by

the psychologist Brenda Milner and the surgeon William

Scoville. (After H.M. died on December 2, 2008, his full name, Henry Molaison, was revealed to the world.) H.M. had suffered for a number of years from untreatable temporal lobe epilepsy caused by brain

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

damage sustained at age 7 years in a bicycle accident.

As an adult, his seizures rendered him unable to work

or lead a normal life, and at the age of 27, he under-

went surgery. Scoville removed the brain regions thought to be responsible for the seizures, including the hippocampal formation, the amygdala, and parts of the multimodal association area of the temporal cortex bilaterally (Figure 52–2). After the surgery, H.M.'s seizures were better controlled, but he was left with a devastating memory deficit (or amnesia). What was so remarkable about H.M.'s deficit was its specificity. He still had normal working memory, for seconds or minutes, indicating that the medial temporal lobe is not necessary for transient memory. He also had long-

term memory for events that had occurred before the operation. For example, he remembered his name, the job he had held, and childhood events. In addition, he retained a command of language, including his vocabulary, indicating that semantic memory––factual knowledge about people, places, and things––was preserved. His IQ remained unchanged, in the range of bright-normal. What H.M. now lacked, and lacked dramatically, was the ability to transfer new information into longterm memory, a deficit termed anterograde amnesia.

He was unable to retain for lengthy periods information about people, places, or objects that he had just encountered. Asked to remember a new telephone number, H.M. could repeat it immediately for seconds to minutes because of his intact working memory. But when distracted, even briefly, he forgot the number. H.M. could not recognize people he met after surgery, even when he met them again and again. For several years, he saw Milner every month, yet each time she entered the room, he reacted as though he had never seen her before. H.M. is not unique. All patients with extensive bilateral lesions of the limbic association areas of the medial temporal lobe show similar longterm memory deficits. H.M. is a historic case because his deficit provided the first clear link between memory and the medial temporal lobe, including the hippocampus. Subse- what is the functional role of the medial temporal lobe memory system? Second, what are the roles of differ- ent subregions within this system? Third, how do these subregions work together with other brain circuits to support different forms of memory? Fourth, where are hippocampal-dependent memories ultimately stored? The Medial Temporal Lobe Is Critical for Episodic Long-Term Memory

## A crucial finding about H.M. was that formation of long-term memory was impaired only for certain types

of information. H.M. and other patients with damage

to the medial temporal lobe were able to form and retain certain types of durable memories just as well as healthy subjects. For example, H.M. learned to draw the outlines of a star while looking at the star and his hand in a mirror (Figure 52–3). Like healthy subjects learning

to remap hand–eye coordination, H.M. initially made many mistakes, but after several days of training, his performance was error-free and comparable to that of healthy subjects. Nevertheless, he did not consciously remember having performed the task. Long-term memory formation in amnesic patients is not limited to motor skills. These patients retain simple reflexive learning, including habituation, sensitiza-

tion, and some forms of conditioning (to be discussed later in this chapter). Furthermore, they are able to improve their performance on certain perceptual and conceptual tasks. For example, they do well with a form of memory called priming, in which perception of a word or object or access to the meaning of a word or object is improved by prior exposure. Thus, when shown only the first few letters of previously studied words, a subject with amnesia is able to generate the same number of studied words as normal subjects, even though the amnesic patient has no conscious memory of having recently encountered the words (Figure 52–4). This pattern of selectively impaired performance in patients with amnesia raised questions about how to classify these different forms of memory: What are the

-key features that distinguish between memories that survive medial temporal lobe damage and those that do not? Early theories by Squire and colleagues suggested that a critical factor may be conscious awareness— damage to the medial temporal lobe appears to impair forms of memory that can be accessed consciously and can be reported on or expressed in words, while leaving intact forms of memory that cannot. For this reason, memories that depend on the medial temporal

18/01/21 6:38 PM

quent studies by Larry Squire and others of patients with brain damage more limited to the hippocampus confirmed its central role in memory. The observation that H.M. and others with medial temporal lobe damage had a profound deficit in the formation of new memories while the retrieval of old memo ries remained largely intact suggested that memories must be transferred over time from the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe to other brain structures. These studies gave rise to four central questions that continue to drive memory research to this day: First,

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1294

A

<!-- image -->

Hippocampus

<!-- image -->

Figure 52–2 The medial temporal lobe and memory

storage.

A. The key components of the medial temporal lobe important

for memory storage. B. The areas of temporal lobe resected (gray shading) in the

patient known as H.M., viewed from the ventral surface of the brain (left hemisphere is on the right side of the image).

Surgery was a bilateral, single-stage procedure, but to illustrate the structures that were removed from the left hemisphere (right side of the image), the left hemisphere is shown here intact. The longitudinal extent of the lesion is shown in a ventral view of the brain (top). Cross sections 1 through 3 show

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1295

B

<!-- image -->

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory

Amygdala

Entorhinal cortex

Hippocampus

Entorhinal cortex

Hippocampus

the estimated extent of areas of the brain removed from H.M.

(Adapted, with permission, from Corkin et al. 1997.)

C. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan of a parasagittal

section from the left side of H.M.'s brain. The calibration bar at the right of the panel has 1-cm increments. The asterisk

in the central area of the scan indicates the resected portion of the anterior temporal lobes. The nearby arrowhead points to the remaining portion of the intraventricular portion of the hippocampal formation. Approximately 2 cm of preserved hippocampal formation is visible bilaterally. Note also the substantial degeneration in the enlarged folial spaces of the cerebellum. (Adapted, with permission, from Corkin et al. 1997.)

18/01/21 6:38 PM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

3rd day priming, skill learning, habit memory, and condition- ing (Figure 52–5). Explicit memory is considered to be highly flexible; multiple pieces of information can be associated under different circumstances. Implicit memory, however, is tightly connected to the original conditions under which the learning occurred. The terms "explicit memory" and "implicit memory" are used to describe two broad forms of memory that differ in their hallmark behavioral characteris -

10 tics and in their neural underpinnings. These forms of memory can be acquired in parallel. For example, one might form an explicit memory of how good a bakery smelled upon entering it yesterday, while at the same time, one might develop an automatic conditioned response of increased salivation upon viewing a picture of the bakery. Moreover, we now believe that these forms of memory, while distinct, normally interact to support behavior, although the precise

a star while viewing his hand in a mirror. The graph plots the

number of times, during each attempt, that he strayed outside the outlines as he drew the star. As with healthy subjects, H.M. improved considerably with repeated attempts despite the fact that he had no recollection of performing the task. (Reproduced, with permission, from Blakemore 1977.)

<!-- image -->

lobe are often referred to as explicit (or declarative)

memory. Explicit memory can be further classified

into episodic memory (the memory of personal expe-

riences or autobiographical memory) and semantic memory (memory for facts). Episodic memory refers to our ability to remember rich details of moments in time, including information about what happened, when, and where. For example, episodic memory is used to recall that we saw the first flowers of spring yesterday or that we heard Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata" several months ago. Semantic memory is used to recall the meanings of words or concepts, among other facts. Cognitive psychologists found a similar distinction between different forms of memory in healthy subjects by using tasks that differ in how memories are

expressed. One type is a nonconscious form of memory that is evident in the performance of a task. This form of memory is often referred to as implicit memory (also referred to as nondeclarative or procedural memory). Implicit memory is typically manifested in an automatic manner, with little conscious processing on the part of the subject. Different forms give rise to

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1296

ABSENT

ABS

INCOME

INC

| FILLY  DISCUSS  CHEESE  ELEMENT  FIL  DIS  CHE  ELE  80  Control   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|

After priming

Figure 52–4 Amnesic subjects differ in their ability to recall

words under two conditions. Subjects were presented with

<!-- image -->

common words and then asked to recall the words. Amnesic

patients did not do well on this test during free recall. However, when subjects were given the first three letters of a word that had been presented and instructed to form the first word that came to mind (word completion), the amnesic subjects performed as well as normal subjects. The baseline guessing rate in the word completion condition for words not previously presented was 9%. (Adapted from Squire 1987.)

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Figure 52–5 Long-term memory

is commonly classified as either

explicit (the memory is reported

verbally) or implicit (the memory is expressed through behavior without conscious awareness).

nature and extent of their interactions are a topic of

ongoing investigation.

There are also ongoing debates about the role of

conscious awareness in memory and about whether it is indeed a necessary feature of memories supported

by the medial temporal lobe. These debates are driven by a growing body of work showing that the same medial temporal circuits necessary for explicit memory are also necessary for some forms of implicit memory (as described below). Indeed, although episodic memory is typically assessed by asking subjects to report the content of their memory, it remains unknown whether conscious accessibility is an integral feature of the memories themselves. Nonetheless, the distinction between implicit and explicit memory played an important historical role in differentiating forms of memory and still offers a productive framework for considering the neural bases of memory. Thus, we use the terms "explicit memory" and "implicit memory" here to distinguish these two forms of memory and the classes of subjective experience and behaviors that they are based on. In the following sections, we focus on episodic memory, which has been the target of a great deal of cognitive neuroscience research in both amnesic patients and healthy individuals. Episodic Memory Processing Involves Encoding, Storage, Retrieval, and Consolidation

## Episodic memory has been studied extensively and offers a window into understanding how the brain builds, stores, and retrieves details about episodes in

our lives. We now know that the brain does not have a single long-term store of episodic memories. Instead, the storage of any item of knowledge is widely distributed among many brain regions that process different aspects of the content of the memory and can be accessed independently (by visual, verbal, or other sensory clues). Second, episodic memory is mediated by at least four related but distinct types of processing: encoding, storage, consolidation, and retrieval.

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1297

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory

Two forms of

long-term memory

<!-- image -->

(declarative)

Events

(episodic)

is initially acquired and processed during the formation

of a new memory. The extent of this processing is criti-

cally important for determining how well the learned material will be remembered. For a memory to persist and be well remembered, the incoming information must undergo what the psychologists Fergus Craik and Robert Lockhart called "deep" encoding. This is accomplished by attending to the information and associating it with memories that were already established. Memory encoding is also stronger when one is motivated to remember, whether because the information has particular emotional or behavioral relevance (eg, a memory for a particularly delicious meal on an enjoyable first date) or whether the information itself is neutral but is associated with something meaningful (eg, remembering the location of that restaurant). Storage refers to the neural mechanisms and sites by which the newly acquired information is retained as a lasting memory over time. One of the remarkable

features about long-term storage is that it seems to have an almost unlimited capacity. In contrast, working memory storage is very limited; psychologists believe that human working memory can hold only a few pieces of information at any one time. Consolidation is the process that transforms temporarily stored and still labile information into a more stable form. As we shall learn in the next two chapters,

consolidation involves expression of genes and protein synthesis that give rise to structural changes at synapses. Finally, retrieval is the process by which stored information is recalled. It involves bringing back to mind different kinds of information that are stored

in different sites. Retrieval of memory is much like perception; it is a constructive process and therefore subject to distortion much as perception is subject to illusions (Box 52–1). When a memory is retrieved, it becomes active again, providing an opportunity for an old memory to be encoded again. Because retrieval is constructive, re-encoding of a retrieved memory can differ from the original memory. For example,

18/01/21 6:38 PM
Figure 52–5 Long-term memory

is commonly classified as either

explicit (the memory is reported

verbally) or implicit (the memory is expressed through behavior without conscious awareness).

nature and extent of their interactions are a topic of

ongoing investigation.

There are also ongoing debates about the role of

conscious awareness in memory and about whether it is indeed a necessary feature of memories supported

by the medial temporal lobe. These debates are driven by a growing body of work showing that the same medial temporal circuits necessary for explicit memory are also necessary for some forms of implicit memory (as described below). Indeed, although episodic memory is typically assessed by asking subjects to report the content of their memory, it remains unknown whether conscious accessibility is an integral feature of the memories themselves. Nonetheless, the distinction between implicit and explicit memory played an important historical role in differentiating forms of memory and still offers a productive framework for considering the neural bases of memory. Thus, we use the terms "explicit memory" and "implicit memory" here to distinguish these two forms of memory and the classes of subjective experience and behaviors that they are based on. In the following sections, we focus on episodic memory, which has been the target of a great deal of cognitive neuroscience research in both amnesic patients and healthy individuals. Episodic Memory Processing Involves Encoding, Storage, Retrieval, and Consolidation

## Episodic memory has been studied extensively and offers a window into understanding how the brain builds, stores, and retrieves details about episodes in

our lives. We now know that the brain does not have a single long-term store of episodic memories. Instead, the storage of any item of knowledge is widely distributed among many brain regions that process different aspects of the content of the memory and can be accessed independently (by visual, verbal, or other sensory clues). Second, episodic memory is mediated by at least four related but distinct types of processing: encoding, storage, consolidation, and retrieval.

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1297

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory

Two forms of

long-term memory

<!-- image -->

(declarative)

Events

(episodic)

is initially acquired and processed during the formation

of a new memory. The extent of this processing is criti-

cally important for determining how well the learned material will be remembered. For a memory to persist and be well remembered, the incoming information must undergo what the psychologists Fergus Craik and Robert Lockhart called "deep" encoding. This is accomplished by attending to the information and associating it with memories that were already established. Memory encoding is also stronger when one is motivated to remember, whether because the information has particular emotional or behavioral relevance (eg, a memory for a particularly delicious meal on an enjoyable first date) or whether the information itself is neutral but is associated with something meaningful (eg, remembering the location of that restaurant). Storage refers to the neural mechanisms and sites by which the newly acquired information is retained as a lasting memory over time. One of the remarkable

features about long-term storage is that it seems to have an almost unlimited capacity. In contrast, working memory storage is very limited; psychologists believe that human working memory can hold only a few pieces of information at any one time. Consolidation is the process that transforms temporarily stored and still labile information into a more stable form. As we shall learn in the next two chapters,

consolidation involves expression of genes and protein synthesis that give rise to structural changes at synapses. Finally, retrieval is the process by which stored information is recalled. It involves bringing back to mind different kinds of information that are stored

in different sites. Retrieval of memory is much like perception; it is a constructive process and therefore subject to distortion much as perception is subject to illusions (Box 52–1). When a memory is retrieved, it becomes active again, providing an opportunity for an old memory to be encoded again. Because retrieval is constructive, re-encoding of a retrieved memory can differ from the original memory. For example,

18/01/21 6:38 PM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Box 52–1 Episodic Memories Are Subject to Change During Recall

## How accurate is episodic memory? This question was explored by the psychologist Frederic Bartlett in a series

of studies in the 1930s in which subjects were asked to

read stories and then retell them. The recalled stories were shorter and more coherent than the original stories, reflecting reconstruction and condensation of the original. The subjects were unaware that they were editing the original stories and often felt more certain about the edited parts than about the unedited parts of the retold

stories. They were not confabulating; they were merely interpreting the original material so that it made sense on recall. Observations such as these demonstrate that episodic memory is malleable. Moreover, the fact that people incorporate later edits into their original memories

leads us to believe that episodic memory is a constructive

re-encoding can include information from the old

memory together with the new context in which it was

retrieved. This re-encoding allows memories of sepa-

rate moments in time to be connected in memory, but it also opens the door to errors in memory, as discussed later in the chapter. Retrieval of information is most efficient when a retrieval cue reminds individuals of the episodic nature of the events linking the elements of the encoded expe-

rience. For example, in a classic behavioral experiment, Craig Barclay and colleagues asked some subjects to encode sentences such as "The man lifted the piano." On a later retrieval test, "something heavy" was a more effective cue for recalling piano than "something with a nice sound." Other subjects, however, encoded the sentence "The man tuned the piano." For them, "something with a nice sound" was a more effective retrieval cue for piano than "something heavy" as it reflected better the initial experience. Retrieval, particularly of explicit memories, also is partially dependent on working memory. Episodic Memory Involves Interactions Between the Medial Temporal Lobe and Association Cortices

## Although studies of amnesic patients during the past few decades have refined our understanding of various types of memory, medial temporal lobe damage

affects all four operations of memory—encoding,

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1298

process in the sense that individuals perceive the envi-

ronment from the standpoint of a specific point in

space as well as a specific point in their own history.

Much like sensory perception, episodic memory is not a passive recording of the external world but an active process in which incoming bottom-up sensory information is shaped by top-down signals, representing prior experience, along the afferent pathways. Likewise, once information is stored, recall is not an exact copy of the information stored. Past experiences are used in the present as cues that help the brain reconstruct a past event. During recall, we use a variety of cognitive strategies, including comparison, inference, shrewd guessing, and supposition, to generate a memory that seems coherent to us, that is consistent with other memories, and that is consistent with our "memory of the memory."

storage, consolidation, and retrieval––and thus it is

often difficult to discern how the medial temporal

lobe contributes to each. fMRI allows us to scan brain

activity in the process of building new memories or retrieving existing memories, and thus to identify specific regions that are active during different processes (Chapter 6). A common method for studying encoding with fMRI is the subsequent memory paradigm. In a typical subsequent memory task, a human subject views a

series of stimuli (eg, words or pictures) one at a time while being scanned with fMRI, often while engaged in a cover task (eg, determining whether the pictures are in color or black and white). A subject's memory for the stimuli is then tested outside of the scanner, allowing the researchers to sort all the encoding events into those that were later remembered compared to those that were later forgotten. fMRI scans show that remembered items, compared with forgotten items, are associated with greater activity in the hippocampus during encoding. This difference is also evident in simultaneous activity in other parts of the brain, including prefrontal, retrosplenial, and parietal cortices. Often, the activity of these regions covaries on a moment-to-moment basis with the activity in the hippocampus during memory encoding, suggesting that these regions are functionally connected (Figure 52–6). These fMRI findings, together with findings from patients with amnesia, provide strong support for an

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Figure 52–6 In the study illustrated here,

neural activity during encoding of visual

events (presentation of words) was

measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Subsequently, recall of the studied words was tested, and each word was classified as either remembered or forgotten. The scans taken during encoding were then sorted into two groups: those made during encoding of words that were later remembered and those made during encoding of words that were later forgotten. The activity in regions of the left prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe was greater during the encoding of words later remembered than those later forgotten (locations denoted by white arrows). At right are the observed fMRI responses in these regions for words later remembered and those later forgotten. (Adapted, with permission, from Wagner et al. 1998.)

important role of the hippocampus in encoding epi-


<!-- image -->

sodic memories. The fMRI findings also extend the

findings from amnesic patients, showing that success-

ful formation of episodic memories depends on interaction between frontoparietal networks and the medial temporal lobe. However, as the medial temporal lobe is a large structure, a key goal is to understand the role of its different subregions. Such information is being provided by higher-resolution fMRI studies that use more powerful brain scanning technologies. These studies reveal that distinct subregions within and outside the hippocampus contribute to different aspects of memory encoding. Thus, whereas some cortical areas surrounding the hippocampus are particularly important for object recognition (perirhinal cortex), others are important for encoding spatial context (parahippocampal cortex). These cortical regions provide strong (but indirect) inputs to the hippocampus proper, which is thought to bind together spatial and object information, forming a unified memory. Interaction between the medial temporal lobe and widely separated cortical regions is also central in memory consolidation and retrieval. It was initially

thought that the hippocampus was not important for retrieval, since patient H.M., whose medial temporal lobe was surgically removed, could still recall childhood memories. In fact, early observations suggested that H.M. could recall many of the experiences of his life up until several years before his operation. These observations of H.M. and other amnesic patients with damage to the medial temporal lobe suggested that old

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1299

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory


Words remembered

Words forgotten



memories must be ultimately stored in various other

cortical regions through interaction with the medial

temporal lobe. However, even though patients with

hippocampal damage like H.M. have some ability to recall older memories, there is evidence that the extent of memory recall may be impaired in these patients. Current thinking suggests that there is a distributed circuit for consolidation and retrieval involving several brain regions, with the hippocampus playing an essential role in the binding of associations during both encoding and retrieval. The cortical regions serve as the long-term repository of the separate elements of information that constitute a memory and in the controlled retrieval and reactivation of the content of the memory itself. As with studies of encoding, studies of retrieval of episodic knowledge have implicated specific regions of association cortex, frontoparietal networks, and

the medial temporal lobe. The retrieval of contextual or event details associated with an episodic memory also involves activity in the hippocampus, with medial temporal lobe retrieval processes facilitating the activation of neocortical representations that were present during encoding. fMRI scans have a fairly limited time resolution due to the relatively slow time course of changes in blood flow associated with brain activity. To achieve

higher temporal resolution of brain activity, researchers can record electrical activity from the human brain using extracellular electrodes. Such recordings are rare and possible only in human patients who are already

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Left inferior prefrontal cortex


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

undergoing brain surgery for medical reasons, such as

severe epilepsy, when electrode implantation is used

to localize the site of seizure generation. In one study,

intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) signals were measured using subdural electrodes placed in the medial temporal lobe and other areas of cortex. A subject first learned associations between pairs of words and then had to retrieve memories of those associations. The retrieval of memories was associated with neural activity in the hippocampus, coupled with neural activity in temporal association cortex, a region involved in language and multisensory integration. This coupled neural activity was associated with a reactivation of cortical patterns that were initially observed when participants first memorized word pairs. This finding provides a link between the neural activity observed in the hippocampus during initial encoding of a memory and the later coupled activity in the temporal association cortex during retrieval. Related observations of reactivation of encoding patterns during retrieval have been reported in numerous human functional imaging studies, documenting the ubiquity of such effects. As with encoding of episodic memory, retrieval involves a complex interaction between the medial temporal lobe and distributed cortical regions, including frontoparietal networks and other high-level association areas. Episodic Memory Contributes to Imagination and Goal-Directed Behavior

## Memory enables us to use our past experience to predict future events, thus promoting adaptive behav-

ior. Like retrieval of memories, imagination of future

events involves construction of details from memory. The first report of a possible connection between memory and imagination came from the case study of patient K.C., as reported by Endel Tulving in 1985. Patient K.C. displayed typical and devastating amnesia as a result of damage to his hippocampus and medial temporal lobe. Similar to patient H.M., he had a complete lack of episodic memory while language and nonepisodic functions were unimpaired. Tulving's studies revealed further that such brain damage was associated with the loss of the ability to imagine events in the future. When asked what he would be doing the next day, K.C. was unable to provide details. The importance of the hippocampus in imagining future events is also seen with fMRI studies. Such studies examined brain activity of healthy individu-

als, comparing activity when subjects were asked to remember an event from the past (eg, think of your birthday last year) with activity when they imagined

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1300

events in the future (eg, imagine a beach vacation next

summer). The subjects were asked to report any vivid

details of the event that came to mind. The MRI scans

showed a striking overlap in the network of brain regions that were active during memory retrieval and imagination of future events. This network included the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, retrosplenial cortex, and lateral parietal and temporal areas (Figure 52–7). Further evidence supporting the view that episodic memory and hippocampal function are necessary for planning future behavior comes from a study on human

performance of a spatial navigation task using virtual reality simulations. High-resolution fMRI and multivoxel pattern analysis (Chapter 6) showed that activity in the hippocampus was related to simulation of navigation goals. Moreover, hippocampal activity during planning covaried with goal-related activity in prefrontal, medial temporal, and medial parietal cortex (Figure 52–8). Episodic memory encoding and storage are also influenced by the adaptive value of events. Alison Adcock and colleagues showed that the anticipation

of a potential reward can enhance memory by eliciting coordinated activity between the medial temporal lobe and midbrain regions that are rich in dopamine neurons. Reward can also retroactively enhance memories. When human participants navigate a maze for a reward, they have better memory for neutral events that happened right before the reward. The ability to retroactively shape episodic memory based on outcomes is important because the relevance of a specific episode may only become known after the fact. Together with the role of episodic memory in constructing the retrieval of past events and in imagining and simulating future events, the findings on reward support the view that a major function of episodic memory is to guide adaptive behaviors. The Hippocampus Supports Episodic Memory by Building Relational Associations

## In addition to the broad role of the hippocampus in episodic memory, future thinking, and goal-directed behavior, studies of rodents first pointed to a role for the

hippocampus in spatial navigation (Chapter 54), findings that were later supported by studies of nonhuman primates and humans. In rodents, single neurons in the hippocampus encode specific spatial information, and lesions of the hippocampus interfere with the animal's memory for spatial location. Functional imaging of the brain in healthy humans shows that activity increases in the right hippocampus when spatial information is recalled and in the left hippocampus when words,

18/01/21 6:38 PM

A

<!-- image -->

with permission, from Schacter, Addis, and Buckner 2007.)

A. Subjects were instructed to either remember a personally experienced event in their past or imagine a plausible event in their future while lying inside a functional magnetic reso-

nance imaging scanner. Events are elicited by a cue word (eg, "beach" or "birthday"). Subjective ratings of event phenomenology (eg, vividness and emotionality of the episode) and detailed event descriptions are often obtained in an interview following the scanning in order to confirm that an episodic event was successfully generated. objects, or people are recalled. These physiological

findings are consistent with the clinical observation

that lesions of the right hippocampus differentially

give rise to problems with spatial orientation, whereas lesions of the left hippocampus differentially cause deficits in verbal memory. The fact that the hippocampus supports spatial processing, semantic memory, and episodic memory

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1301

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory

Lateral

parietal

cortex

B. The core brain system that mediates past and future thinking

is consistently activated while remembering the past, when envi-

sioning the future, and during related forms of mental simulation.

- Prominent components of this network include medial prefrontal regions, posterior regions in the medial and lateral parietal cortex (extending into the precuneus and retrosplenial cortex), the lateral temporal cortex, and the medial temporal lobe. Moreover, regions within this core brain system are functionally correlated with each other and with the hippocampus. This core brain system is thought to function adaptively to integrate information about relationships and associations from past experiences to construct mental simulations about possible future events.

raises questions about how the hippocampus con-

tributes to such different behaviors. One compelling

theory, proposed by Howard Eichenbaum and Neal

Cohen, suggests that the hippocampus provides a general mechanism for forming and storing complex multimodal associations. According to this view, the hippocampus binds in memory the separate elements of experiences, encoding events as relational maps of

18/01/21 6:38 PM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Figure 52–8 Neural circuits supporting

memory-based goal-directed navigation.

(Reproduced, with permission, from Brown

et al. 2016.) A. Human participants navigate to goals in a virtual reality environment while being scanned with functional magnetic resonance imaging.

They first explore the space and learn where goals are located and then are tested on their ability to navigate to specific goals. B. Navigational planning elicits goal-related activity in a core network including the hippocampus, medial temporal lobe, parahippocampal cortex Navigation toward goals Navigator view Overhead view of goals Goal OFC

<!-- image -->

(PHC), and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC).

items within spatial and temporal contexts, thus

<!-- image -->

composing a "memory space" that can distinguish Medial OFC

view that the hippocampus encodes relations offers

insights into the mechanism by which memories are

distinct episodes, or sequences of events, even when

the same (or similar) events occur in different episodes (Figure 52–9). As discussed later in this chapter, the Events: items in 1

context

Figure 52–9 The hippocampus supports relational pro-

cessing underlying episodic memory. A conceptual illus-

tration of a memory space designating three key types of built and explains why, in some cases, the hippocam- pus may contribute to memory processes that are not consciously accessible but do encode relations. 6


relational processing: events, episodes, and networks. The schematic illustrates processing of two distinct episodes (Episode A and Episode B), which have both distinct and overlapping elements. For example, the episodes might be two distinct visits to an Italian restaurant on separate evenings with the same friend. The evenings are experienced as distinct (different days, different weather, different moods), yet they share some overlap (the company of the same friend at the same restaurant). Events (1) are defined as items (objects,

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1302

Episodes:

temporal

organization

behaviors) that are associated with the context in which they

occurred (denoted here as events 1 to 6 in each episode, such

as the specific table you sat at, the food you ordered, etc.).

Episodes (2) are defined in this view as the temporal organization of these events. While most of the items in each episode are unique, some of them overlap (here, items 3 and 4; in the example, your friend and the restaurant). Relational networks (3) are formed via associations between events and episodes by way of the overlapping events, supporting the capacity for links between indirectly related events. (Reproduced, with permission, from Eichenbaum and Cohen 2014. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc.)

A

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Implicit Memory Supports a Range of

Behaviors in Humans and Animals

## Just as there are many ways in which explicit memory guides behavior, there are also many ways in which

nonexplicit forms of memory, those without conscious

awareness, can influence behavior. Implicit memory refers to forms of knowledge that guide behavior without conscious awareness. Priming, for example, is the automatic influence of exposure to one cue on processing of a later cue. Priming can be classified as conceptual or perceptual. Conceptual priming provides enhanced access to task-relevant semantic knowledge because that

knowledge has been used before. It is correlated with decreased activity in left prefrontal regions that subserve initial retrieval of semantic knowledge. In contrast, perceptual priming occurs within a specific sensory modality and depends on cortical modules that operate on sensory information about the form and structure of words and objects. Damage to unimodal sensory regions of cortex impairs modality-specific perceptual priming. For example, one patient with an extensive surgical lesion

of the right occipital lobe failed to demonstrate visual priming for words but had normal explicit memory (Figure 52–10). This condition is the reverse of that found in amnesic patients such as H.M., suggesting that the neural mechanisms of priming are distinct from those for explicit memory. The fact that perceptual priming can be intact in patients with amnesia due to medial temporal damage further suggests that it is distinct from explicit memory. Different Forms of Implicit Memory Involve Different Neural Circuits

## Other forms of implicit memory subserve the learning of habits and motor, perceptual, and cognitive

skills and the formation and expression of conditioned

responses. In general, these forms of implicit memory are characterized by incremental learning, which proceeds gradually with repetition and, in some cases, is driven by reinforcement. The learning of habits, motor skills, and conditioned responses can take place independently of the medial temporal lobe system. For example, H.M.

was able to acquire new visuomotor skills, like the mirror-tracing task (see Figure 52–3). Therefore, early theories posited that these forms of memory generally do not depend on the medial temporal lobe but, rather, depend on the basal ganglia and cerebellum (see Chapters 37 and 38). However, subsequent work

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1303

A

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

M.S.

control

Figure 52–10 The right occipital cortex is required for visual

A. Structural magnetic resonance imaging depicts the near-

complete removal of the right occipital cortex in a patient, M.S., who suffered pharmacologically intractable epilepsy with a right

occipital cortical focus. B. Font-specific priming is a form of visual priming in which the individual is better able to identify a briefly flashed word when the type font is identical to an earlier presentation, compared

to identification when the font is different. Priming is measured as performance when the font is the same minus performance when the font is different. Font-specific priming is intact in amnesic patients (AMN) and their controls as well as in the controls for patient M.S., but not in M.S. himself. The patient M.S. has normal explicit memory, even for visual cues (data not shown), but lacks implicit memory for specific properties of visually presented words.

suggested that this is not a general rule and that the

medial temporal lobe is required for forms of implicit

learning that store relational associations, even when

such associations are learned through repetition and appear to take place without conscious awareness. It is now thought that several kinds of incremental implicit learning involve the medial temporal lobes. For example, Turk-Browne and colleagues investi-

gated implicit learning of regularities between visual cues, called statistical learning. In a typical statistical learning task, human subjects are presented with a

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

stream of sounds or images that follow a structured

sequence or "grammar" of repetitions. Learning of

the sequence is typically measured by a faster reaction

time to repeated compared to nonrepeated sequences. At first glance, it would appear that statistical learning should not involve the medial temporal lobe: The learning is nonverbal, it does not require conscious thought and is therefore implicit, and it is assumed to reflect the accumulated computation of probabilistic relationships across multiple episodes, rather than the specific memory of one episode. Yet fMRI studies show that the hippocampus is active during statistical learning, and damage to the medial temporal lobe has been found to impair performance on this implicit task. Statistical learning is an example of how learning takes place through repetition. New perceptual, motor, or cognitive abilities are also learned through

repetition. With practice, performance becomes more accurate and faster, and these improvements generalize to learning novel information. Skill learning moves from a cognitive stage, where knowledge is represented explicitly and the learner must pay a great deal of attention to performance, to an autonomous stage, where the skill can be executed without much con scious attention. As an example, driving a car initially requires that one be consciously aware of each component of the skill, but after practice, one no longer attends to the individual components. The learning of sensorimotor skills depends on numerous brain regions that vary with the specific associations being learned. As we learned in Chapter 38, trial-by-trial feedback on their choice. The relationship between the cues and the feedback varies probabilisti- cally over the course of the task so that participants must keep updating their responses based on the feedback. Because learning takes place over numerous trials, explicit memory of any one specific trial may not be as useful for successful performance as the gradual accumulation of feedback-driven learning of stimulus– outcome associations. fMRI studies demonstrate that incremental learn -ing of stimulus–reward associations depends on the striatum, the area of the basal ganglia that receives input from neocortex, and its modulatory dopaminergic inputs. Patients with a loss of striatal dopamine, as occurs in Parkinson disease, are less effective at learning based on trial-by-trial reinforcement. These findings are consistent with other studies that indicate dopamine has an important role in modulating cortico-striatal circuitry for reinforcement learning (see Chapter 38). At first glance, stimulus-reward learning appears to be precisely the sort of learning that does not depend on the medial temporal lobe: It is implicit

-rather than explicit, and it occurs gradually rather than through an explicit memory for a single event. Indeed, early theories posited that learning probabilistic stimulus–reward associations does not depend on the medial temporal lobe. However, subsequent work has revealed that the hippocampus does contribute to stimulus–reward learning under some circumstances, such as when the task demands learning of more complex stimulus–stimulus associations (Figure 52–11). The contribution of the hippocampus to implicit learning takes place via interactions with other cortical and subcortical circuits. fMRI studies show functional con -nectivity between the hippocampus and the striatum in support of learning across a variety of tasks. Interactions between the hippocampus and the striatum are sometimes competitive and sometimes cooperative, depending on the demands of the task. Implicit Memory Can Be Associative or Nonassociative

## Some forms of implicit memory have also been studied in nonhuman animals, and these animal studies have

distinguished two types of implicit memory: nonasso-

ciative and associative. With nonassociative learning, an animal learns about the properties of a single stimulus. With associative learning, the animal learns about the relationship between two stimuli or between a stimulus and a behavior. We consider the cellular mechanisms of implicit memory in animals in the next chapter.

18/01/21 6:38 PM

these include the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and neocortex. Dysfunction of the basal ganglia in patients with Parkinson and Huntington disease impairs learning of motor skills. Patients with cerebellar lesions also have difficulties acquiring some motor skills. Functional imaging of healthy individuals during sensorimotor learning shows changes in the activity of the basal ganglia and cerebellum and their connectivity with cortical regions. Danielle Bassett and colleagues have used network-analysis algorithms applied to whole-brain fMRI data to characterize dynamic changes in network functional connectivity that take place during motor skill learning. Finally, skilled behavior can depend on structural changes in motor neocortex, as seen by the expansion of the cortical representation of the fingers in musicians (Chapter 53). Habits emerge from the repeated association of cues or actions with rewarding outcomes. Habit learning in humans is studied with tasks that involve incre-

mental learning of stimulus–reward associations. In a typical task, subjects perform a series of trials in which they are asked to choose among visual cues and receive

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1304

A

with permission, from Duncan et al. 2018.)

Congural reinforcement learning task Correct!

about the configuration, this same task also elicits activity

in the hippocampus and increased coupling of activity in the

hippocampus and the striatum. Scatter plots show that the

A. Participants use trial-by-trial reinforcement to learn to predict outcomes (rain or sun) based on cues (colorful shapes). The cues have a probabilistic relation to each weather outcome that the

<!-- image -->

viewer learns by trial and error. The weather can be predicted based either on each individual cue or on the combined presentation of the two cues (their configuration). Reinforcement learning models can discern which strategy each subject uses. B. The striatum is known to play a critical role in learning to update choices based on reinforcement. When subjects learn

Nonassociative learning results when a subject is

exposed once or repeatedly to a single type of stim-

ulus. Two forms of nonassociative learning are com-

mon in everyday life: habituation and sensitization. Habituation is a decrease in a response that occurs when a benign stimulus is presented repeatedly. For example, most people in the United States are startled when they first hear the sound of a firecracker on Independence Day, but as the day progresses, they become

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1305

extent to which subjects use a configural learning strategy correlates with blood oxygenation level–dependent activity in the hippocampus and with functional coupling between the hippocampus and the striatum. The images show activity in hippocampus and the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), a region in the ventral portion of the striatum that responds to rewarding stimuli. (Abbreviation: fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging.)

accustomed to the noise and do not respond. Sensitiza-

tion (or pseudo-conditioning) is an enhanced response

to a wide variety of stimuli after the presentation of an

intense or noxious stimulus. For example, an animal will respond more vigorously to a mild tactile stimulus after receiving a painful pinch. Moreover, a sensitizing stimulus can override the effects of habituation, a process called dishabituation. For example, after the startle response to a noise has been reduced by habituation,

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

one can restore the intensity of response to the noise by

delivering a strong pinch.

With sensitization and dishabituation, the tim- internal representations of the stimulus and response or between the representations of one stimulus and another. The strength of the connection was thought

ing of stimuli is not important because no association between stimuli must be learned. In contrast, with two

forms of associative learning, the timing of the stimuli to be associated is critical. Classical conditioning involves learning a relationship between two stimuli, whereas operant conditioning involves learning a relationship between the organism's behavior and the consequences of that behavior. Classical conditioning was first described in the early 1900s by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov. The essence of classical conditioning is the pairing of

two stimuli: a conditioned stimulus and an uncondi tioned stimulus. The conditioned stimulus (CS), such as a light, a tone, or a touch, is chosen because it produces either no overt response or a weak response usually unrelated to the response that eventually will be learned. The unconditioned stimulus (US), such as food or a shock, is chosen because it normally produces a strong and consistent response (the unconditioned response), such as salivation or withdrawal of a limb. Unconditioned responses are innate; they are produced without learning. Repeated presentation of a CS followed by a US gradually elicits a new or different response called the conditioned response. One way of explaining conditioning is that repeated pairing of the CS and US causes the CS to become an anticipatory signal for the US. With suffi-

-to depend on the number of pairings of CS and US. A substantial body of evidence now indicates that classical conditioning cannot be adequately explained simply by the fact that two events or stimuli occur one after the other (Figure 52–12). Indeed, it would not be adaptive to depend solely on sequence. Rather, all animals capable of associative conditioning, from snails to humans, remember the salient relationship between associated events. Thus, classical conditioning, and perhaps all forms of associative learning, enables animals to distinguish events that reliably occur together from those that are only randomly associated. Lesions in several regions of the brain affect classical conditioning. One well-studied example is conditioning of the protective eyeblink reflex, a form

cient experience, an animal will respond to the CS as if it were anticipating the US. For example, if a light is followed repeatedly by the presentation of meat, eventually the sight of the light itself will make the animal salivate. Thus, classical conditioning is one way an animal learns to predict events. The probability that an established conditioned response will occur decreases if the CS is repeatedly presented without the US. This process is known as of motor learning. A puff of air to the eye naturally causes an eyeblink. A conditioned eyeblink can be established by pairing the puff with a tone that precedes the puff. Studies in rabbits indicate that the conditioned response (an eyeblink in response to a tone) is abolished by a lesion at either of two sites. Damage to the vermis of the cerebellum abolishes the condi -tioned response but does not affect the unconditioned response (eyeblink in response to a puff of air). Interestingly, neurons in the same area of the cerebellum show learning-dependent increases in activity that closely parallel the development of the conditioned behavior. A lesion in the interpositus nucleus, a deep cerebellar nucleus, also abolishes the conditioned eyeblink. Thus, both the vermis and the deep nuclei of the cerebellum play an important role in conditioning the eyeblink, and perhaps other simple forms of classical conditioning involving skeletal muscle movement. Another well-studied example is fear conditioning, which depends on the amygdala. In fear conditioning, a neutral cue, such as a tone, is paired with an

extinction. If a light that has been paired with food is later repeatedly presented in the absence of food, it will gradually cease to evoke salivation. Extinction is an important adaptive mechanism; it would be maladaptive for an animal to continue to respond to cues that are no longer meaningful. The available evidence indicates that extinction is not the same as forgetting; instead, something new is learned—the CS now signals that the US will not occur. For many years, psychologists thought that classical conditioning resulted as long as the CS preceded the US within a critical time interval. According to this

view, each time a CS is followed by a US (reinforcing stimulus), a connection is strengthened between the

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1306

aversive outcome, such as a shock. This pairing leads to a conditioned fear response in which the neutral tone alone elicits a behavioral reaction, such as freez -ing. Fear conditioning depends on plasticity in the inputs to and connections between the subnuclei of the amygdala, particularly the basolateral amygdala, as we will discuss in the next chapter. Operant Conditioning Involves Associating a Specific Behavior With a Reinforcing Event

## A second major paradigm of associative learning, discovered by Edgar Thorndike and systematically studied by B. F. Skinner and others, is operant conditioning

18/01/21 6:38 PM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

one can restore the intensity of response to the noise by

delivering a strong pinch.

With sensitization and dishabituation, the tim- internal representations of the stimulus and response or between the representations of one stimulus and another. The strength of the connection was thought

ing of stimuli is not important because no association between stimuli must be learned. In contrast, with two

forms of associative learning, the timing of the stimuli to be associated is critical. Classical conditioning involves learning a relationship between two stimuli, whereas operant conditioning involves learning a relationship between the organism's behavior and the consequences of that behavior. Classical conditioning was first described in the early 1900s by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov. The essence of classical conditioning is the pairing of

two stimuli: a conditioned stimulus and an uncondi tioned stimulus. The conditioned stimulus (CS), such as a light, a tone, or a touch, is chosen because it produces either no overt response or a weak response usually unrelated to the response that eventually will be learned. The unconditioned stimulus (US), such as food or a shock, is chosen because it normally produces a strong and consistent response (the unconditioned response), such as salivation or withdrawal of a limb. Unconditioned responses are innate; they are produced without learning. Repeated presentation of a CS followed by a US gradually elicits a new or different response called the conditioned response. One way of explaining conditioning is that repeated pairing of the CS and US causes the CS to become an anticipatory signal for the US. With suffi-

-to depend on the number of pairings of CS and US. A substantial body of evidence now indicates that classical conditioning cannot be adequately explained simply by the fact that two events or stimuli occur one after the other (Figure 52–12). Indeed, it would not be adaptive to depend solely on sequence. Rather, all animals capable of associative conditioning, from snails to humans, remember the salient relationship between associated events. Thus, classical conditioning, and perhaps all forms of associative learning, enables animals to distinguish events that reliably occur together from those that are only randomly associated. Lesions in several regions of the brain affect classical conditioning. One well-studied example is conditioning of the protective eyeblink reflex, a form

cient experience, an animal will respond to the CS as if it were anticipating the US. For example, if a light is followed repeatedly by the presentation of meat, eventually the sight of the light itself will make the animal salivate. Thus, classical conditioning is one way an animal learns to predict events. The probability that an established conditioned response will occur decreases if the CS is repeatedly presented without the US. This process is known as of motor learning. A puff of air to the eye naturally causes an eyeblink. A conditioned eyeblink can be established by pairing the puff with a tone that precedes the puff. Studies in rabbits indicate that the conditioned response (an eyeblink in response to a tone) is abolished by a lesion at either of two sites. Damage to the vermis of the cerebellum abolishes the condi -tioned response but does not affect the unconditioned response (eyeblink in response to a puff of air). Interestingly, neurons in the same area of the cerebellum show learning-dependent increases in activity that closely parallel the development of the conditioned behavior. A lesion in the interpositus nucleus, a deep cerebellar nucleus, also abolishes the conditioned eyeblink. Thus, both the vermis and the deep nuclei of the cerebellum play an important role in conditioning the eyeblink, and perhaps other simple forms of classical conditioning involving skeletal muscle movement. Another well-studied example is fear conditioning, which depends on the amygdala. In fear conditioning, a neutral cue, such as a tone, is paired with an

extinction. If a light that has been paired with food is later repeatedly presented in the absence of food, it will gradually cease to evoke salivation. Extinction is an important adaptive mechanism; it would be maladaptive for an animal to continue to respond to cues that are no longer meaningful. The available evidence indicates that extinction is not the same as forgetting; instead, something new is learned—the CS now signals that the US will not occur. For many years, psychologists thought that classical conditioning resulted as long as the CS preceded the US within a critical time interval. According to this

view, each time a CS is followed by a US (reinforcing stimulus), a connection is strengthened between the

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1306

aversive outcome, such as a shock. This pairing leads to a conditioned fear response in which the neutral tone alone elicits a behavioral reaction, such as freez -ing. Fear conditioning depends on plasticity in the inputs to and connections between the subnuclei of the amygdala, particularly the basolateral amygdala, as we will discuss in the next chapter. Operant Conditioning Involves Associating a Specific Behavior With a Reinforcing Event

## A second major paradigm of associative learning, discovered by Edgar Thorndike and systematically studied by B. F. Skinner and others, is operant conditioning

18/01/21 6:38 PM

A 0% Unpaired shocks

CS

(tone)

<!-- image -->

rats, a tone (the conditioned stimulus [CS]) was paired with

an electric shock (the unconditioned stimulus [US]) in four out of 10 of the trials (red ticks). In some trial blocks, the shock was presented without the tone (green ticks). Suppression of lever-pressing to obtain food is a sign of freezing, a conditioned defensive response. The degree of conditioning was evaluated by determining how effective the tone alone was (also called trial-and-error learning). In a typical labo-

ratory example of operant conditioning, a hungry rat

or pigeon is placed in a test chamber in which the ani-

mal is rewarded for a specific action. For example, the chamber may have a lever protruding from one wall. Because of previous learning, or through play and random activity, the animal will occasionally press the lever. If the animal promptly receives a positive reinforcer (eg, food) after pressing the lever, it will begin to press the lever more often than the spontaneous rate. The animal can be described as having learned that among its many behaviors (eg, grooming, rearing, and walking) one behavior is followed by food. With this information, the animal is likely to press the lever whenever it is hungry. If we think of classical conditioning as the formation of a predictive relationship between two stimuli (the CS and the US), operant conditioning can be con-

sidered as the formation of a predictive relationship between an action and an outcome. Unlike classical conditioning, which tests the responsiveness of a reflex to a stimulus, operant conditioning tests behavior that occurs either spontaneously or without an identifiable stimulus. Thus, operant behaviors are said to be emitted rather than elicited. In general, actions that

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1307

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory


Strength of conditioning

in suppressing lever-pressing to obtain food. (Adapted from

A. Maximal conditioning occurred when the US was presented

only with the CS. B–C. Little or no conditioning occurred when the shock was

presented without the tone almost as often as with it (40%). Some conditioning occurred when the shock occurred without

the tone 20% of the time.

are rewarded tend to be repeated, whereas actions fol-

lowed by aversive, although not necessarily painful,

consequences tend not to be repeated. Many experi-

mental psychologists think that this simple idea, called the law of effect, governs much voluntary behavior. Operant and classical conditioning involve different kinds of association—an association between an action and a reward or between two stimuli, respec-

tively. However, the laws of operant and classical conditioning are quite similar. For example, timing is critical in both. In operant conditioning, the reinforcer usually must closely follow the operant action. If the reinforcer is delayed too long, only weak conditioning occurs. Similarly, classical conditioning is generally poor if the interval between the CS and US is too long or if the US precedes the CS. Associative Learning Is Constrained by the Biology of the Organism

## Animals generally learn to associate stimuli that are relevant to their survival. For example, animals readily learn to avoid certain foods that have been followed

by a negative reinforcement (eg, nausea produced by a poison), a phenomenon termed taste aversion .

18/01/21 6:38 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Unlike most other forms of conditioning, taste aver-

sion develops even when the unconditioned response

(poison-induced nausea) occurs after a long delay, up

to hours after the CS (specific taste). This makes biological sense because the ill effects of infected foods and naturally occurring toxins usually follow ingestion only after some delay. For most species, including humans, taste-aversion conditioning occurs only when certain tastes are associated with illness. Taste aversion develops poorly if a taste is followed by a painful stimulus that does not produce nausea. Also, animals do not develop an aversion to a visual or auditory stimulus that has been paired with nausea. Errors and Imperfections in Memory Shed

Light on Normal Memory Processes

## Memory allows us to revisit our personal past; provides access to a vast network of facts, associations,

and concepts; and supports learning and adaptive

behavior. But memory is not perfect. We often forget events rapidly or gradually, sometimes distort the past, and occasionally remember events that we would prefer to forget. In the 1930s, the British psychologist Frederic Bartlett reported experiments in which people read and tried to remember complex stories. He showed that people often misremember many features of the stories, often distorting information based on their expectations of what should have happened. Forgetting and distortion can provide important insights into the workings of memory. Memory's imperfections have been classified into seven basic categories, dubbed the "seven sins of memory": transience, absent-mindedness, blocking,

misattribution, suggestibility, bias, and persistence. Here, we focus on six of these. Absent-mindedness results from a lack of attention to immediate experience. Absent-mindedness during encoding is a likely source of common memory fail-

ures such as forgetting where one recently placed an object. Absent-mindedness also occurs when we forget to carry out a particular task such as picking up groceries on the way home from the office, even though we initially encoded the relevant information. Blocking refers to a temporary inability to access information stored in memory. People often have partial awareness of a sought-after word or image but are

nonetheless unable to recall the entire word accurately or completely. Sometimes, it feels like a blocked word is on "the tip of the tongue"—we are aware of the initial letter of the word, the number of syllables in it, or a like-sounding word. Determining which information

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1308

is correct and which is incorrect requires a great deal of

conscious effort.

Absent-mindedness and blocking are sins of omis-

sion: At a moment when we need to remember infor -mation, it is inaccessible. However, memory is also

characterized by sins of commission, situations in which some form of memory is present but wrong. Misattribution refers to the association of a memory with an incorrect time, place, or person. False recognition, a type of misattribution, occurs when individu-

als report that they "remember" items or events that never happened. Such false memories have been documented in controlled experiments where people claim to have seen or heard words or objects that had not been presented previously but are similar in meaning or appearance to what was actually presented. Studies using positron emission tomography imaging and fMRI have shown that many brain regions show similar levels of activity during both true and false recognition, which may be one reason why false memories sometimes feel like real ones. Suggestibility refers to the tendency to incorporate new information into memory, usually as a result of leading questions or suggestions about what may have

been experienced. Research using hypnotic suggestion indicates that various kinds of false memories can be implanted in highly suggestible individuals, such as remembering hearing loud noises at night. Studies with young adults have also shown that repeated suggestions about a childhood experience can produce memories of events that never occurred. These find -ings are important theoretically because they highlight that memory is not simply a "playback" of past experiences (Box 52–1). Despite these important theoretical and practical implications, next to nothing is known about the neural bases of suggestibility. Bias refers to distortions and unconscious influ -ences on memory that reflect one's general knowledge and beliefs. People often misremember the past

to make it consistent with what they presently believe, know, or feel. This idea is consistent with the idea of "predictive coding" supported by studies showing that even low-level neural mechanisms of perception and sensation are shaped by expectations. The specific brain mechanisms by which expectations influence memory are not well understood. Persistence refers to obsessive memory, constant remembering of information or events that we might want to forget. Neuroimaging studies have illuminated

some neurobiological factors that contribute to persistent emotional memories. Some key results implicate the amygdala, the almond-shaped structure near the hippocampus long known to be involved in emotional

18/01/21 6:38 PM

processing (Chapter 42). Studies indicate that the level

of recall of emotional components of a story is corre-

lated with the level of activity in the amygdala during

presentation of the story. Related studies implicate the amygdala in the encoding and retrieval of emotionally charged experiences that can repeatedly intrude into consciousness. Although persistence can be disabling, it also has adaptive value. The persistence of memories of disturbing experiences increases the likelihood that we

will recall information about arousing or traumatic events at times when it may be crucial for survival. Indeed, many memory imperfections may have adaptive value. False memories and suggestibility may both be related to one of the most basic adaptive

functions of memory: the integration of experiences separated in time into a network of learned associations. For memory to play an important role in guiding future behavior, it must be flexible so that we can leverage past experiences to make inferences about future events even when the circumstances have changed. Similarly, although the various forms of forgetting (transience, absent-mindedness, and blocking) can be annoying, a memory system that automatically retains every detail of every experience could result in an overwhelming clutter of useless trivia. This is exactly what happened in the fascinating case of Shereshevski, a mnemonist studied by the Russian neuropsychologist Alexander Luria and described in the book The Mind of a Mnemonist. Shereshevski was filled with highly detailed memories of his past experiences but was unable to generalize or to think at an abstract level. A healthy memory system does not encode, store, and retrieve all the details of every experience. Thus, transience, absent-mindedness, and blocking allow us to avoid the unfortunate fate of Shereshevski. Highlights

1. Different forms of learning and memory can be

distinguished behaviorally and neurally. Work-

ing memory maintains goal-relevant information

- for short periods. Explicit (or declarative) memory involves two classes of knowledge: episodic memory, which represents personal experiences, and semantic memory, which represents general knowledge and facts. Implicit memory includes forms of perceptual and conceptual priming, as well as the learning of motor and perceptual skills, perceptual regularities, and reinforced habits. 2. Encoding, storage, retrieval, and consolidation of new explicit memories depend on interactions

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1309

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory


between specific regions within the neocortex and

medial temporal lobe and specific hippocampal

subregions. The initiation of long-term storage of

- explicit memory requires the temporal lobe system, as highlighted by studies of amnesic patients such as H.M. Consolidation processes stabilize stored representations, rendering explicit memories less dependent on the medial temporal lobe. Retrieval of explicit memories involves the medial temporal lobe, as well as frontoparietal networks that subserve attention and cognitive control. 3. Multiple processes interact to support memoryguided behavior. Retrieval of episodic memory guides the imagining of future events, which
- is important for making decisions about future choices and actions. Motivationally significant events are prioritized in memory through the enhancement of encoding, storage, and consolidation processes. Motivation also impacts retrieval, perhaps through different mechanisms of prioritization. 4. Implicit memory emerges automatically in the course of perceiving, thinking, and acting. It tends to be inflexible and expressed in the per-
- formance of tasks even without conscious aware -ness. Implicit memory involves a wide variety of brain regions and circuits, including cortical areas that support the specific perceptual, conceptual, or motor systems recruited to process a stimulus or perform a task, as well as the striatum and the amygdala. Implicit learning that involves the encoding of relational associations additionally involves the hippocampus. 5. Imperfections and errors in remembering provide telltale clues about learning and memory mechanisms. The past can be forgotten or distorted, indi-
- cating that memory is not a faithful record of all details of every experience. Retrieved memories are the result of a complex interplay among various brain regions and can be reshaped over time by multiple influences. Various forms of forgetting and distortion tell us much about the flexibility of memory that allows the brain to adapt to the physical and social environment.

Daphna Shohamy

Daniel L. Schacter

18/01/21 6:38 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Suggested Reading

Baddeley AD. 1986. Working Memory. Oxford: Oxford Univ.

Press.

Eichenbaum H. 2017. Prefrontal-hippocampal interactions in

- episodic memory. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:547–558. Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. 2001. From Conditioning to Con-
- scious Recollection: Memory Systems of the Brain. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Kamin LJ. 1969. Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning. In: BA Campbell, RM Church (eds). Pun ishment and Aversive Behavior, pp. 279–296. New York:

Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. 2014. Can we reconcile the declar-

ative memory and spatial navigation views on hippocam-

pal function? Neuron 83:764–770.

- Eldridge LL, Knowlton BJ, Furmanski CS, et al. 2000. Remembering episodes: a selective role for the hippocampus during retrieval. Nat Neurosci 3:1149–1152.
- Hebb DO. 1966. A Textbook of Psychology. Philadelphia: Saunders. Luria AR. 1968. The Mind of a Mnemonist. New York: Basic Books.
- -Naya Y, Yoshida M, Miyashita Y. 2001. Backward spreading of memory-related signal in the primate temporal cortex. Science 291:661–664.
- Nyberg L, Habib R, McIntosh AR, Tulving E. 2000. Reactivation of encoding-related brain activity during memory retrieval. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11120–11124.
- Appleton–Century–Crofts. Kumaran D, Hassabis D, McClelland JL. 2016. What learning systems do intelligent agents need? Complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends Cog Sci
- 20:512–534. Milner B, Squire LR, Kandel ER. 1998. Cognitive neuroscience and the study of memory. Neuron 20:445–468. Schacter DL, Benoit RG, Szpunar KK. 2017. Episodic future
- thinking: mechanisms and functions. Curr Opin Behav Sci 17:41–50.
- Shohamy D, Turk-Browne NB. 2013. Mechanisms for widespread hippocampal involvement in cognition. J Exp Psychol Gen 142:1159–1170.
- Tulving E. 1983. Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C, Ekstrom A, Wiltgen B. 2019. A
- contextual binding theory of episodic memory: systems consolidation reconsidered. Nat Rev Neurosci 20:364–375.
- References

Adcock RA, Thangavel A, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Knutson B,

Gabrieli JD. 2006. Reward motivated learning: mesolimbic

activation precedes memory formation. Neuron 50:507–517.

- Bartlett FC. 1932. Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. Blakemore C. 1977. Mechanics of the Mind. Cambridge:
- Cambridge Univ. Press. Brewer JB, Zhao Z, Desmond JE, et al. 1998. Making memo-
- ries: brain activity that predicts how well visual experience will be remembered. Science 281:1185–1187.
- Brown TI, Carr VA, LaRocque KF, et al. 2016. Prospective representation of navigational goals in the human hippocampus. Science 352:1323–1326.
- Corkin S. 2002. What's new with the amnesic patient H.M.? Nat Rev Neurosci 3:153–160. Corkin S, Amaral DG, González RG, et al. 1997. H.M.'s
- medial temporal lobe lesion: findings from magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 17:3964–3979.
- Craik FIM, Lockhart RS. 1972. Levels of processing: a framework for memory research. J Verb Learn Verb Behav 11:671–684.
- Duncan K, Doll BB, Daw ND, Shohamy D. 2018. More than the sum of its parts: a role for the hippocampus in configural reinforcement learning. Neuron 98:646–657.

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1310

- Pavlov IP. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes: Investigation of the Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. GV Anrep (transl). London: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Penfield W. 1958. Functional localization in temporal and deep sylvian areas. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis 36:210–226. Petrides M. 1994. Frontal lobes and behavior. Curr Opin
- Neurobiol 4:207–211. Poldrack RA, Clark J, Pare-Blagoev EJ, et al. 2001. Interactive
- memory systems in the human brain. Nature 414:546–550. Rainer G, Asaad WF, Miller EK. 1998. Memory fields of neu-
- rons in the primate prefrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:15008–15013.
- Rescorla RA. 1968. Probability of shock in the presence and absence of CS in fear conditioning. J Comp Physiol Psychol 66:1–5.
- Rescorla RA. 1988. Behavioral studies of Pavlovian condi -tioning. Annu Rev Neurosci 11:329–352. Schacter DL. 2001. The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind
- Forgets and Remembers. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin.
- Schacter DL, Addis DR. 2007. The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: remembering the past and imagining the future. Philos Trans Roy Soc B 362:773–786.
- Schacter DL, Addis DR, Buckner RL. 2007. Remembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:657–661.
- Schacter DL, Guerin SA, St. Jacques PL. 2011. Memory distortion: an adaptive perspective. Trends Cog Sci 15:467–474. Sestieri C, Shulman GL, Corbetta M. 2017. The contribution
- of the human posterior parietal cortex to episodic memory. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:183–192.
- Shohamy D, Adcock RA. 2010. Dopamine and adaptive memory. Trends Cog Sci 14:464–472. Skinner BF. 1938. The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental
- Analysis. New York: Appleton–Century–Crofts. Squire LR. 1987. Memory and Brain. New York: Oxford Univ.
- Press. Thorndike EL. 1911. Animal Intelligence: Experimental Studies

.

- New York: Macmillan. Tomita H, Ohbayashi M, Nakahara K, et al. 1999. Top-down
- signal from prefrontal cortex in executive control of memory retrieval. Nature 401:699–703.

18/01/21 6:38 PM

Tulving E, Schacter DL. 1990. Priming and human memory

systems. Science 247:301–306.

Uncapher M, Wagner AD. 2009. Posterior parietal cortex and

- episodic encoding: insights from fMRI subsequent memory effects and dual attention theory. Neurobiol Learn
- Mem 91:139–154. Vaidya CJ, Gabrieli JD, Verfaellie M, et al. 1998. Font-specific priming following global amnesia and occipital lobe damage. Neuropsychology 12:183–192.
- Vaz AP Inati SK, Brunel N, Zaghloul KA. 2019. Coupled ripple oscillations between the medial temporal lobe and neocortex retrieve human memory. Science 363:
- 975–978.

Kandel-Ch52\_1285-1311.indd 1311

Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory


Wagner AD. 2002. Cognitive control and episodic memory:

contributions from prefrontal cortex. In: LR Squire, DL

Schacter (eds). Neuropsychology of Memory, 3rd ed., pp.

- 174–192. New York: Guilford Press. Wagner AD, Schacter DL, Rotte M, et al. 1998. Building memories: remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity. Science 281:1188–1191.
- Wheeler ME, Petersen SE, Buckner RL. 2000. Memory's echo: vivid remembering reactivates sensory-specific cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11125–11129.
- Wimmer GE, Shohamy D. 2012. Preference by association: how memory mechanisms in the hippocampus bias decisions. Science 338:270–273.

18/01/21 6:38 PM


Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage

## and the Biological Basis of Individuality

Storage of Implicit Memory Involves Changes in the

Effectiveness of Synaptic Transmission

Habituation Results From Presynaptic Depression of

## Synaptic Transmission Sensitization Involves Presynaptic Facilitation of

Synaptic Transmission Classical Threat Conditioning Involves Facilitation of

Synaptic Transmission Long-Term Storage of Implicit Memory Involves Synaptic

Changes Mediated by the cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway Cyclic AMP Signaling Has a Role in Long-Term

## Sensitization The Role of Noncoding RNAs in the Regulation of

Transcription Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Is Synapse Specific

Maintaining Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Requires a Prion-Like Protein Regulator of Local Protein Synthesis

Memory Stored in a Sensory-Motor Synapse Becomes

Destabilized Following Retrieval but Can Be Restabilized Classical Threat Conditioning of Defensive Responses in

Flies Also Uses the cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway Memory of Threat Learning in Mammals Involves

## the Amygdala Learning-Induced Changes in the Structure of the Brain

## Contribute to the Biological Basis of Individuality Highlights

T

hroughout this book we have emphasized that

all behavior is a function of the brain and that

malfunctions of the brain produce characteristic

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1312

disturbances of behavior. Behavior is also shaped by

experience. How does experience act on the neural

circuits of the brain to change behavior? How is new

information acquired by the brain, and once acquired, how is it stored, retrieved, and remembered? In the previous chapter, we saw that memory is not a single process but has at least two major forms. Implicit memory operates unconsciously and automat-

ically, as in the memory for conditioned responses, habits, and perceptual and motor skills, whereas explicit memory operates consciously, as in the memory for people, places, and objects. The circuitry for long-term memory storage differs between explicit and implicit memory. Long-term storage of explicit memory begins in the hippocampus and the medial temporal lobe of the neocortex, whereas long-term storage of different types of implicit memory requires a family of neural structures: the neocortex for priming, the striatum for skills and habits, the amygdala for Pavlovian threat conditioning (also known as fear conditioning), the cerebellum for learned motor skills, and certain reflex pathways for nonassociative learning such as habituation and sensitization (Figure 53–1). Over time, explicit memories are transferred to different regions of the neocortex. In addition, many cognitive, motor, and perceptual skills that we initially store

as explicit memory ultimately become so ingrained with practice that they become stored as implicit memory. The transference from explicit to implicit memory and the difference between them is dramatically demonstrated in the case of the English musician and conductor Clive Waring, who in 1985 sustained a viral infection of his brain (herpes encephalitis) that affected

18/12/20 10:52 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

Two forms of

long-term memory

<!-- image -->

striatum, amygdala, cerebellum, and, in the simplest cases,

the hippocampus and temporal cortex. Waring was left with a devastating loss of memory for events or

people he had encountered even a minute or two

earlier, but his ability to read music, play the piano, or conduct a chorale was unaffected. Once a performance was completed, however, he could not remember a thing about it. Similarly, the abstract expressionist painter William de Kooning developed severe disturbances of explicit memory as a result of Alzheimer disease. As the dis-

ease progressed and his memory for people, places, and objects deteriorated, he nevertheless continued to produce important and interesting paintings. This aspect of his creative personality was relatively untouched. In this chapter, we examine the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie implicit memory storage in invertebrate and vertebrate animals. We focus

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1313

Hippocampus

the reflex pathways themselves. Explicit memory requires the

medial temporal lobe and the hippocampus, as well as certain

areas of neocortex (not shown).

on learning about threats (sometimes called fear learning). Implicit memory for motor skills and habits in

mammals involving the cerebellum and basal gan-

glia was considered in Chapters 37 and 38. In the next chapter, we examine the biology of explicit memory in mammals. Storage of Implicit Memory Involves Changes

in the Effectiveness of Synaptic Transmission

## Studies of elementary forms of implicit learning— habituation, sensitization, and classical conditioning—

provided the conceptual framework for investigating

the neural mechanisms of memory storage. Such learning has been analyzed in simple invertebrates and in a variety of vertebrate behaviors, such as the flexion and

18/12/20 10:53 AM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

eye blink reflexes, and also defensive behaviors such

as freezing. These simple forms of implicit memory

involve changes in the effectiveness of the synaptic

pathways that mediate the behavior. Habituation Results From Presynaptic Depression of Synaptic Transmission

## Habituation is the simplest form of implicit learning. It occurs, for example, when an animal learns to ignore a novel stimulus. An animal reacts to a new stimulus

with a series of orienting responses. If the stimulus is neither beneficial nor harmful, the animal learns to ignore it after repeated exposure. The physiological basis of this behavior was first investigated by Charles Sherrington while studying posture and locomotion in cats. Sherrington observed a

decrease in the intensity of certain reflexes in response to repeated electrical stimulation of the motor pathways. He suggested that this decrease, which he called habituation, is caused by diminished synaptic effectiveness in the stimulated pathways. Habituation was later investigated at the cellular level by Alden Spencer and Richard Thompson. They found close cellular and behavioral parallels between

habituation of a spinal flexion reflex in cats (the withdrawal of a limb from a noxious stimulus) and habituation of more complex human behaviors. They showed that during habituation the strength of the input from local excitatory interneurons onto motor neurons in the spinal cord decreased, whereas the input to the same interneurons from sensory neurons innervating the skin was unchanged. Because the organization of interneurons in the vertebrate spinal cord is quite complex, it was difficult to analyze further the cellular mechanisms of habitu-

ation in the flexion reflex. Progress required a simpler system. The marine mollusk Aplysia californica, which has a simple nervous system of about 20,000 central neurons, proved to be an excellent system for studying implicit forms of memory. Aplysia has a repertory of defensive reflexes for withdrawing its respiratory gill and siphon, a small fleshy spout above the gill used to expel seawater and

waste (Figure 53–2A). These reflexes are similar to the withdrawal reflex of the leg studied by Spencer and Thompson. Mild touching of the siphon elicits reflex withdrawal of both the siphon and gill. With repeated stimulation, these reflexes habituate. As we shall see, these responses can also be dishabituated, sensitized, and classically conditioned. The neural circuit mediating the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia has been studied in detail. Touching

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1314

the siphon excites a population of mechanoreceptor

sensory neurons that innervate the siphon. The release

of glutamate from sensory neuron terminals gener-

ates fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in interneurons and motor cells. The EPSPs from the sensory cells and interneurons summate on motor cells both temporally and spatially, causing them to discharge strongly, thereby producing vigorous withdrawal of the gill. If the siphon is repeatedly touched, however, the monosynaptic EPSPs produced by sensory neurons in both interneurons and motor cells decrease progressively, paralleling the habituation of gill withdrawal. In addition, repeated stimulation also leads to a decrease in the strength of synaptic transmission from the excitatory interneurons to the motor neurons; the net result is that the reflex response diminishes (Figure 53–2B,C). What reduces the effectiveness of synaptic transmission between the sensory neurons and their postsynaptic cells during repeated stimulation? Quantal

analysis (Chapter 15) revealed that the amount of synaptic glutamate released from presynaptic terminals of sensory neurons decreases. That is, fewer synaptic vesicles are released with each action potential in the sensory neuron; the sensitivity of the postsynaptic glutamate receptors does not change. Because the reduction in transmission occurs in the activated pathway itself and does not require another modulatory cell, the reduction is referred to as homosynaptic depression. This depression lasts many minutes. An enduring change in the functional strength of synaptic connections thus constitutes the cellular mechanism mediating short-term habituation. As

change of this type occurs at several sites in the gillwithdrawal reflex circuit, memory is distributed and stored throughout the circuit. Depression of synaptic transmission by sensory neurons, interneurons, or both is a common mechanism underlying habituation of escape responses of crayfish and cockroaches as well as startle reflexes in vertebrates. How long can the effectiveness of a synapse change last? In Aplysia, a single session of 10 stimuli leads to short-term habituation of the withdrawal

reflex lasting minutes. Four sessions separated by periods ranging from several hours to 1 day produce long-term habituation, lasting as long as 3 weeks (Figure 53–3). Anatomical studies indicate that long-term habituation is caused by a decrease in the number of synaptic contacts between sensory and motor neurons.

In naïve animals, 90% of the sensory neurons make physiologically detectable connections with identified motor neurons. In contrast, in animals trained for

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

A Experimental setup

Siphon Mantle

shelf Tactile

## stimulus

A. A dorsal view of Aplysia illustrates the respiratory organ (gill)

and the mantle shelf, which ends in the siphon, a fleshy spout used to expel seawater and waste. Touching the siphon elicits the

<!-- image -->

gill-withdrawal reflex. Repeated stimulation leads to habituation. B. Simplified diagrams of the gill-withdrawal reflex circuit and sites involved in habituation. Approximately 24 mechanoreceptor neurons in the abdominal ganglion innervate the siphon

skin. These sensory cells make excitatory synapses onto a cluster of six motor neurons that innervate the gill, as well as on interneurons that modulate the firing of the motor neurons. (For simplicity, only one of each type of neuron is illustrated here.) Touching the siphon leads to withdrawal of the gill (dashed

long-term habituation, the incidence of connections is

reduced to 30%; the reduction in number of synapses

persists for a week and does not fully recover even

3 weeks later (see Figure 53–9). As we shall see, the converse occurs with long-term sensitization, where synaptic transmission is associated with an increase in the number of synapses between sensory and motor neurons.

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1315


20 mV

2 mV

60 ms

10 s

C. Repeated stimulation of the siphon sensory neuron (top

traces) leads to a progressive depression of synaptic transmission between the sensory and motor neurons. The size of the

motor neuron excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) gradually decreases despite no change in the presynaptic action potential (AP). In a separate experiment, repeated stimulation of the siphon results in a decrease in gill withdrawal (habituation). One hour after repetitive stimulation, both the EPSP and gill withdrawal have recovered. Habituation involves a decrease in transmitter release at many synaptic sites throughout the reflex circuit. (Adapted, with permission, from Pinsker et al. 1970; Castellucci and Kandel 1974.)

Not all classes of synapses are equally modifi-

able. In Aplysia, the strength of some synapses rarely

changes, even with repeated activation. In synapses

specifically involved in learning (such as the connections between sensory and motor neurons in the withdrawal reflex circuit), a relatively small amount of training can produce large and enduring changes in synaptic strength.

18/12/20 10:53 AM
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

A Experimental setup

Siphon Mantle

shelf Tactile

## stimulus

A. A dorsal view of Aplysia illustrates the respiratory organ (gill)

and the mantle shelf, which ends in the siphon, a fleshy spout used to expel seawater and waste. Touching the siphon elicits the

<!-- image -->

gill-withdrawal reflex. Repeated stimulation leads to habituation. B. Simplified diagrams of the gill-withdrawal reflex circuit and sites involved in habituation. Approximately 24 mechanoreceptor neurons in the abdominal ganglion innervate the siphon

skin. These sensory cells make excitatory synapses onto a cluster of six motor neurons that innervate the gill, as well as on interneurons that modulate the firing of the motor neurons. (For simplicity, only one of each type of neuron is illustrated here.) Touching the siphon leads to withdrawal of the gill (dashed

long-term habituation, the incidence of connections is

reduced to 30%; the reduction in number of synapses

persists for a week and does not fully recover even

3 weeks later (see Figure 53–9). As we shall see, the converse occurs with long-term sensitization, where synaptic transmission is associated with an increase in the number of synapses between sensory and motor neurons.

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1315


20 mV

2 mV

60 ms

10 s

C. Repeated stimulation of the siphon sensory neuron (top

traces) leads to a progressive depression of synaptic transmission between the sensory and motor neurons. The size of the

motor neuron excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) gradually decreases despite no change in the presynaptic action potential (AP). In a separate experiment, repeated stimulation of the siphon results in a decrease in gill withdrawal (habituation). One hour after repetitive stimulation, both the EPSP and gill withdrawal have recovered. Habituation involves a decrease in transmitter release at many synaptic sites throughout the reflex circuit. (Adapted, with permission, from Pinsker et al. 1970; Castellucci and Kandel 1974.)

Not all classes of synapses are equally modifi-

able. In Aplysia, the strength of some synapses rarely

changes, even with repeated activation. In synapses

specifically involved in learning (such as the connections between sensory and motor neurons in the withdrawal reflex circuit), a relatively small amount of training can produce large and enduring changes in synaptic strength.

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A Depression of synaptic potentials by long-term habituation

Control Habituated (1 week)

<!-- image -->



Carew, and Kandel 1978.)

A. Comparison of action potentials in sensory neurons and the postsynaptic potential in motor neurons in an untrained animal (control) and one that has been subjected to long-term habitua-

<!-- image -->

tion. In the habituated animal 1 week after training, no synaptic potential occurs in the motor neuron in response to the sensory neuron action potential. B. After long-term habituation training, the mean percentage of sensory neurons making physiologically detectable connections with motor neurons is reduced even at 3 weeks.

Sensitization Involves Presynaptic Facilitation of

Synaptic Transmission

## The ability to recognize and respond to danger is necessary for survival. Not only snails and flies, but all animals, including humans, must distinguish preda-

tors from prey and hostile environments from safe ones. Because the ability to respond to threats is a

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1316

universal requirement of survival, it has been con-

served throughout evolution, allowing studies of

invertebrates to shed light on neural mechanisms in

mammals. At the beginning of the 20th century, both Freud and Pavlov appreciated that anticipatory defensive responses to danger signals are biologically adaptive,

50 ms

10 mV 5 mV a fact that likely accounts for the profound conservation of this capacity throughout vertebrates and invertebrates. In the laboratory, threat (fear) conditioning is typically studied by presenting a neutral stimulus, such as a tone, prior to the onset of an aversive stimulus, such as electrical shock. The two stimuli become associated such that the tone leads to the elicitation of defensive behaviors that protect against the harmful consequences predicted by the tone. Freud called this "signal anxiety," which prepares the individual for fight or flight when there is even the suggestion of external danger. When an animal repeatedly encounters a harmless stimulus, its responsiveness to the stimulus habituates, as seen above. In contrast, when the animal confronts

3 weeks a harmful stimulus, it typically learns to respond more vigorously to a subsequent presentation of the same stimulus. Presentation of a harmful stimulus can even cause an animal to mount a defensive response to a subsequent harmless stimulus. As a result, defensive reflexes for withdrawal and escape become heightened. This enhancement of reflex responses is called sensitization. Like habituation, sensitization can be transient or long lasting. A single shock to the tail of an Aplysia produces short-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex that lasts minutes; five or more shocks to the tail produce sensitization lasting days to weeks. Tail shock is also sufficient to overcome the effects of habituation and enhance a habituated gill-withdrawal reflex, a process termed dishabituation . Sensitization and dishabituation result from an enhancement in synaptic transmission at several connections in the neural circuit of the gill-withdrawal

-

reflex, including the connections made by sensory neurons with motor neurons and interneurons—the same synapses depressed by habituation (Figure 53–4A). Typically, modifiable synapses can be regulated bidirectionally, participate in more than one type of learning, and store more than one type of memory. The bidirectional synaptic changes that underlie habituation and sensitization are the result of different cel lular mechanisms. In Aplysia, the same synapses that are weakened by habituation through a homosynaptic process can be strengthened by sensitization through a heterosynaptic process that depends on modulatory

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

interneurons activated by the harmful stimulus to

the tail.

At least three groups of modulatory interneurons

are involved in sensitization. The best studied use serotonin as a transmitter (Figure 53–4B). The seroton-

ergic interneurons form synapses on many regions of the sensory neurons, including axo-axonic synapses on the presynaptic terminals of the sensory cells. After a single tail shock, the serotonin released from the interneurons binds to a receptor in the sensory neurons that is coupled to a stimulatory G protein that increases the activity of adenylyl cyclase. This action produces the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which in turn activates the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) (Chapter 14). Serotonin also activates a second type of G-protein– coupled receptor that leads to the hydrolysis of phospholipids and the activation of protein kinase C (PKC). The protein phosphorylation mediated by PKA and PKC enhances the release of transmitter from sensory neurons through at least two mechanisms


to those that humans experience and label as "fear."

This distinction is important because humans can

respond to threats behaviorally and physiologically in

the absence of any reported feeling of fear. This terminology allows the findings from research on implicit learning in all animals, from the simplest worm to humans, to be interpreted in an objective manner without invoking empirically unverifiable subjective fear states in animals. For classical conditioning of the Aplysia gill-withdrawal reflex, a weak touch to the siphon serves as the conditioned stimulus while a strong shock to the

influx tail serves as the unconditioned stimulus. When the gill-withdrawal reflex is classically conditioned, gill withdrawal in response to siphon stimulation alone is greatly enhanced. This enhancement is even more dramatic than the enhancement produced in an unpaired pathway by tail shock alone (sensitization). In classical conditioning, the timing of the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli is critical. To be effective, the conditioned stimulus (siphon touch) must precede (and thus predict) the unconditioned stimulus (tail shock), often within an interval of about 0.5 seconds. The convergence in individual sensory neurons of the signals initiated by the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli is critical. Alone, a strong shock to the

(Figure 53–4B). In one action, PKA phosphorylates a K + channel, causing it to close. This broadens the action potential and thus enhances the duration of Ca 2+ through voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels, which in turn enhances transmitter release. In a second action, protein phosphorylation through PKC enhances the functioning of the release machinery directly. Presynaptic facilitation in response to release of serotonin by a tail shock lasts for a period of many minutes. Repeated noxious stimuli can strengthen synaptic activity for days (by a mechanism we consider below). Classical Threat Conditioning Involves Facilitation of Synaptic Transmission

## Classical conditioning is a more complex form of learning. Rather than learning about the properties of one stimulus, as in habituation and sensitization,

tail (unconditioned stimulus) will excite serotonergic interneurons that form synapses on presynaptic terminals of the siphon sensory neurons, resulting in presynaptic facilitation (Figure 53–5A). However, when the tail shock immediately follows a slight tap on the siphon (conditioned stimulus), the serotonin from the interneurons produces even greater presynaptic facilitation, a process termed activity-dependent facilitation (Figure 53–5B). How does this work? During conditioning, the modulatory interneurons activated by tail shock release serotonin shortly after the action potential pro-

the animal learns to associate one type of stimulus with another. As described in Chapter 52, an initial weak conditioned stimulus (eg, the ringing of a bell) becomes highly effective in producing a response when paired with a strong unconditioned stimulus (eg, presentation of food). In reflexes that can be enhanced by both classical conditioning and sensitization, such as the defensive withdrawal reflexes of Aplysia, classical conditioning results in greater and longer-lasting enhancement. Although aversive classical conditioning is traditionally referred to as fear conditioning, we will use the more neutral term threat conditioning to avoid the impli-

cation that animals have subjective states comparable

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1317

duced in the siphon sensory neurons by the tap on the siphon. The action potential triggers an influx of Ca 2+ into the presynaptic terminals of the sensory neurons, and the Ca 2+ binds to calmodulin, which in turn binds to the enzyme, adenylyl cyclase. This primes the adenylyl cyclase so that it responds more vigorously to the serotonin released following the tail shock. This in turn enhances the production of cAMP, which increases the amount of presynaptic facilitation. If the order of stimuli is reversed so that serotonin release precedes Ca 2+ influx in the presynaptic sensory terminals, there is no potentiation and no classical conditioning. Thus, the cellular mechanism of classical conditioning in the monosynaptic pathway of the withdrawal reflex is largely an elaboration of the mechanism of

18/12/20 10:53 AM

A Gill sensitization Tactile stimulus Sensory

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1318

Initial Sensitized

50 ms

10 s

Sensitized

10 mV

1 ms

10 mV

5 mV

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

sensitization, with the added feature that the adenylyl

cyclase serves as a coincidence detector in the presynap-

tic sensory neuron, recognizing the temporal order of

the physiological responses to the tail shock (unconditioned stimulus) and the siphon tap (conditioned stimulus). In addition to the presynaptic component of activity-dependent facilitation, a postsynaptic component is triggered by Ca 2+ influx into the motor neuron

when it is highly excited by the siphon sensory neurons. The properties of this postsynaptic mechanism are similar to those of long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission in the mammalian brain (discussed later in this chapter and in Chapters 13 and 54). Long-Term Storage of Implicit Memory

Involves Synaptic Changes Mediated by the

cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway

## Cyclic AMP Signaling Has a Role in Long-Term Sensitization

## In all forms of learning, practice makes perfect. Repeated experience converts short-term memory

into a long-term form. In Aplysia, the form of long-

term memory that has been most intensively studied is long-term sensitization. Like the short-term form, long-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex involves changes in the strength of connections at several synapses. But in addition, it also recruits the growth of new synaptic connections.

Figure 53–4 (Opposite) Short-term sensitization of the

gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia

.

A. Sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex is produced by

## applying a noxious stimulus to another part of the body, such as the tail. A shock to the tail activates tail sensory neurons

that excite facilitating (modulatory) interneurons, which form synapses on the cell body and terminals of the mechanoreceptor sensory neurons that innervate the siphon. Through these axo-axonic synapses, the modulatory interneurons enhance transmitter release from the siphon sensory neurons onto their postsynaptic gill motor neurons (presynaptic facilitation), thus enhancing gill withdrawal. Presynaptic facilitation results, in part, from a prolongation of the sensory neuron action potential (AP; bottom traces). (Abbreviation: EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential.) (Adapted, with permission, from Pinsker et al. 1970; Klein and Kandel 1980.) B. Presynaptic facilitation in the sensory neuron is thought to occur by means of two biochemical pathways. The diagram shows details of the synaptic complex in the dashed box in

part A .

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1319


Five spaced training sessions (or repeated applica-

tions of serotonin) over approximately 1 hour produce

long-term sensitization and long-term synaptic facili-

tation lasting 1 or more days. Spaced training over several days produces sensitization that persists for 1 or more weeks. Long-term sensitization, like the shortterm form, requires protein phosphorylation that is dependent on increased levels of cAMP (Figure 53–6). The conversion of short-term memory into longterm memory, called consolidation, requires synthesis of messenger RNAs and proteins in the neurons in the

circuit. Thus, activation of specific gene expression is required for long-term memory. The transition from short-term to long-term memory depends on the prolonged rise in cAMP that follows repeated applications of serotonin. The increase in cAMP leads to prolonged activation of PKA, allowing the catalytic subunit of the kinase to translocate into the nucleus of the sen -sory neurons. It also leads indirectly to activation of a second protein kinase, the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), a kinase commonly associated with cellular growth (Chapter 14). Within the nucleus, the catalytic subunit of PKA phosphorylates and thereby activates the transcription factor CREB-1 (cAMP r esponse element binding protein 1), which binds a promoter element called CRE (cAMP recognition element) (Figures 53–6 and 53–7). To turn on gene transcription, phosphorylated CREB-1 recruits a transcriptional coactivator, CREBbinding protein (CBP), to the promoter region. CBP

has two important properties that facilitate transcriptional activation: It recruits RNA polymerase II to the

Pathway 1: A facilitating interneuron releases serotonin

(5-HT), which binds to metabotropic receptors in the sensory

neuron terminal. This action engages a G protein (G

s

), which

in turn increases the activity of adenylyl cyclase. The adenylyl cyclase converts adenosine triphosphate to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which binds to the regulatory subunit of protein kinase A (PKA), thus activating its catalytic subunit. The catalytic subunit phosphorylates certain K + channels, thereby closing the channels and decreasing the outward K + current. This prolongs the action potential, thus increasing the influx of Ca 2+ through voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels and thereby augmenting transmitter release. Pathway 2: Serotonin binds to a second class of metabotropic receptor that activates the G q/11 class of G protein that enhances the activity of phospholipase C (PLC). The PLC activ-

ity leads to production of diacylglycerol, which activates protein kinase C (PKC). The PKC phosphorylates presynaptic proteins, resulting in the mobilization of vesicles containing glutamate from a reserve pool to a releasable pool at the active zone, thus increasing the efficiency of transmitter release.

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A Unpaired pathway

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 53–5 Classical conditioning of the gill-withdrawal

reflex in Aplysia

(Adapted, with permission, from

Hawkins et al. 1983.)

Sensory

neuron

1 Unpaired stimulation

Siphon

## Tail

<!-- image -->

Motor Siphon

- neuron sensory

neuron

Gill Siphon (CS)

<!-- image -->

## Tail (US)

<!-- image -->

Siphon

## sensory

neuron

A. The siphon is stimulated by a light tap and the tail is shocked, but the two stimuli are not paired in time. The tail shock excites facilitatory interneurons that form synapses on

<!-- image -->

the presynaptic terminals of sensory neurons innervating the mantle shelf and siphon. This is the mechanism of sensitization. 1. The pattern of unpaired stimulation during training. 2. Under these conditions, the size of the motor neuron test excita -tory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) is only weakly facilitated by the tail shock. Often, as in this example, the EPSP actually decreases slightly despite the tail shock because repeated unpaired stimulation of the siphon leads to synaptic depression due to habituation.

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1320

20 mV

50 ms

5 mV

B. The tail shock is paired in time with stimulation of the

siphon. 1. The siphon is touched (conditioned stimulus [CS])

immediately prior to shocking the tail (unconditioned stimulus

[US]). As a result, the siphon sensory neurons are primed to be more responsive to input from the facilitatory interneurons in the unconditioned pathway. This is the mechanism of classical conditioning; it selectively amplifies the response of the conditioned pathway. 2. Recordings of test EPSPs in an identified motor neuron produced by a siphon sensory neuron before training and 1 hour after training. After training with paired sensory input, the EPSP in the siphon motor neuron is considerably greater than either the EPSP before training or the EPSP following unpaired tail shock (shown in part A2). This synaptic amplification produces a more vigorous gill withdrawal.

5 min

20 mV

50 ms

5 mV

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Siphon Nucleus

<!-- image -->

A. Long-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex of

Aplysia involves long-lasting facilitation of transmitter release at the synapses between sensory and motor neurons.

B. Long-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex leads to persistent activity of protein kinase A (PKA), resulting in the growth of new synaptic connections. Repeated tail shock leads to

more pronounced elevation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), producing long-term facilitation (lasting 1 or more days) that outlasts the increase in cAMP and recruits the synthesis of new proteins. This inductive mechanism is initiated by translocation of PKA to the nucleus (pathway 1), where PKA phosphorylates the transcriptional activator cAMP response element binding

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1321

inducible genes, activating gene transcription (pathway 3). PKA

also activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which phosphorylates the transcriptional repressor cAMP response element binding protein 2 (CREB-2), thus removing its repressive action. One gene activated by CREB-1 encodes a ubiquitin hydrolase, a component of a specific ubiquitin proteasome that leads to the proteolytic cleavage of the regulatory subunit of PKA, resulting in persistent activity of PKA, even after cAMP has returned to its resting level (pathway 4). CREB-1 also activates the expression of the transcription factor C/EBP, which leads to expression of a set of unidentified proteins important for the growth of new synaptic connections (pathway 5).

18/12/20 10:53 AM

C/EBP


Figure 53–7 Regulation of histone acetylation by

serotonin, CREB-1, and CBP.

Transcription

blocked CREB-1

<!-- image -->

TATA

Nucleosome

DNA

CREB-1 phosphorylation and exclusion of CREB-2

<!-- image -->

A. Under basal conditions, the activator CREB-1 (here

in complex with CREB-2) occupies the binding site for cAMP recognition element (CRE) within the promoter

region of its target genes. In the example shown here, CREB-1 binds to the CRE within the C/EBP promoter. In the basal state, CREB-1 binding is not able to activate transcription because the TATA box, the core promoter region responsible for recruiting RNA polymerase II (Pol II) during transcription initiation, is inaccessible because the DNA is tightly bound to histone proteins in the nucleosome. B. Serotonin (5-HT) activates protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates CREB-1 and indirectly enhances CREB-2 phosphorylation by MAPK, causing CREB-2

to dissociate from the promoter. This allows CREB-1 to form a complex at the promoter with CREB binding protein (CBP). Activated CBP acetylates specific lysine residues of the histones, causing them to bind less tightly to DNA. Along with other changes in chromatin structure, acetylation facilitates the repositioning of the nucleosome that previously blocked access of the Pol II complex to the TATA box. This repositioning allows Pol II to be recruited to initiate transcription of the C/EBP gene. (Abbreviation: TBP, TATA binding protein.)

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1322

<!-- image -->

P

Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

promoter, and it functions as an acetyltransferase, add-

ing acetyl groups to certain lysine residues on its sub-

strate proteins. One of the most important substrates

of CBP are DNA-binding histone proteins, which are components of nucleosomes, the fundamental building blocks of chromatin. The histones contain a series of positively charged basic residues that strongly interact with the negatively charged phosphates of DNA. This interaction causes DNA to become tightly wrapped around the nucleosomes, much like string is wrapped around a spool, thereby preventing necessary transcription factors from accessing their gene targets. The binding of CBP to CREB-1 leads to histone acetylation, which causes a number of important structural and functional changes at the level of the nucleo-

some. For example, acetylation neutralizes the positive charge of lysine residues in the histone tail domains, decreasing the affinity of histones for DNA. Also, specific classes of transcriptional activators can bind to acetylated histones and facilitate the repositioning of nucleosomes at the promoter region. Together, these and other types of chromatin modifications serve to regulate the accessibility of chromatin to the transcriptional machinery, and thus enhance the ability of a gene to be transcribed. This type of modification of DNA structure is termed epigenetic regulation. As we will see in Chapter 54, a mutation in the gene encoding CBP underlies Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a disorder associated with mental retardation. The turning on of transcription by PKA also depends on its ability to indirectly activate the MAPK pathway (Chapter 14). MAPK phosphorylates the tran-

scription factor CREB-2, relieving its inhibitory action on transcription (Figure 53–6B). The combined effects of CREB-1 activation and relief of CREB-2 repression induce a cascade of new gene expression important for learning and memory (Figure 53–7). The presence of both a repressor (CREB-2) and an activator (CREB-1) of transcription at the first step in long-term facilitation suggests that the threshold for

long-term memory storage can be regulated. Indeed, we see in everyday life that the ease with which shortterm memory is transferred into long-term memory varies greatly with attention, mood, and social context. The Role of Noncoding RNAs in the Regulation of Transcription

## There are other targets of transcription and chromatin regulation in memory consolidation and reconsolida-

tion besides messenger RNAs. Of particular interest

are noncoding RNAs such as microRNAs (miRNAs), PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), and long noncoding

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1323


RNAs. These are also targeted to specific genetic sites,

and their expression in turn regulates transcriptional

and posttranscriptional mechanisms.

Studies in Aplysia show that miRNAs and piRNAs are both regulated by neuronal activity and contribute to long-term facilitation. MicroRNAs are a class of

conserved noncoding RNAs, 20 to 23 nucleotides in length, that contribute to transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression through a specific set of RNA–protein machinery. In Aplysia, the most abundant and conserved brain species of these miRNAs are present in sensory neurons, where one of them—miRNA-124—normally constrains serotonininduced synaptic facilitation by inhibiting the translation of CREB-1 mRNA, suppressing levels of CREB-1 protein. Serotonin inhibits the synthesis of miRNA-124, thereby leading to the disinhibition of the translation of CREB-1 mRNA, enabling the initiation of CREB-1– mediated transcription. The piRNAs are 28 to 32 nucleotides in length, slightly longer than miRNAs, and bind to a protein called Piwi. Individual piRNAs promote the methylation of specific DNA sequences, thereby silencing the genes, providing another example of epigenetic regulation. One piRNA, piRNA-F, increases in response to serotonin, which leads to the methylation of the promoter of CREB-2, reducing CREB-2 gene transcription. Thus, we see here an example of integrative action at the transcriptional level. Serotonin regulates both piRNA and microRNA in a coordinated fashion:

Serotonin rapidly decreases levels of miRNA-124 and facilitates the activation of CREB-1, which begins the process of memory consolidation. After a delay, serotonin also increases levels of piRNA-F, resulting in the methylation and silencing of the promoter of the transcription repressor CREB-2. The decrease in CREB-2 increases the duration of action of CREB-1, thereby consolidating a stable form of long-term memory in the sensory neuron (Figure 53–8). Two of the genes expressed in the wake of CREB-1 activation and the consequential alteration in chromatin structure are important in the early development

of long-term facilitation. One is a gene for ubiquitin carboxyterminal hydrolase, the other a gene for a transcription factor, CAAT box enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), a component of a gene cascade necessary for synthesizing proteins needed for the growth of new synaptic connections (Figures 53–6 and 53–7). The hydrolase facilitates ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation (Chapter 7) and helps enhance activation of PKA. PKA is made up of four subunits;

two regulatory subunits inhibit two catalytic subunits (Chapter 14). With long-term training and the

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Sensory

neuron

<!-- image -->

tion of the sensory to motor neuron synapses is consolidated

through the action of two distinct classes of small noncoding RNA molecules. miRNA-124 normally acts to suppress levels of the CREB-1 transcription factor by binding to its mRNA and inhibiting its translation. Serotonin (5-HT) downregulates miRNA-124 levels through a mechanism requiring mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK). This enhances the levels of CREB-1, promoting activation of CREB-1–dependent transcription of gene products necessary for memory consolidation. In a complementary pathway, 5-HT enhances with a delay the synthesis of several piRNAs, including piRNA-F, which bind to the Piwi protein. The piRNA-F/Piwi complex leads to enhanced methylation of the CREB-2 gene, resulting in long-lasting transcriptional repression of CREB-2 and decreased levels of CREB-2 protein. Because CREB-2 normally inhibits the action of CREB-1, the increased levels of piRNA-F in response to 5-HT enhance and prolong CREB-1 activity, resulting in more effective memory consolidation. induction of the hydrolase, approximately 25% of the

regulatory subunits are degraded in the sensory neu-

rons. As a result, free catalytic subunits can continue

to phosphorylate proteins important for the enhancement of transmitter release and the strengthening of synaptic connections, including CREB-1, long after

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1324

cAMP has returned to its resting level (Figure 53–6B).

Formation of a constitutively active enzyme is there-

fore the simplest molecular mechanism for long-term

memory. With repeated training, a second-messenger kinase critical for short-term facilitation can remain persistently active for up to 24 hours without requiring a continuous activating signal. The second and more enduring consequence of CREB-1 activation is the activation of the transcription factor C/EBP. This transcription factor forms both a

homodimer with itself and a heterodimer with another transcription factor called activating factor. Together, these factors act on downstream genes that trigger the growth of new synaptic connections that support longterm memory. With long-term sensitization, the number of presynaptic terminals in the sensory neurons in the gillwithdrawal circuit doubles (Figure 53–9). The dendrites

of the motor neurons also grow to accommodate the additional synaptic input. Thus, long-term structural changes in both post- and presynaptic cells increase the number of synapses. Long-term habituation, in contrast, leads to pruning of synaptic connections, as described above. Long-term disuse of functional connections between sensory and motor neurons reduces the number of terminals of each sensory neuron by one-third (Figure 53–9A). Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Is Synapse Specific

A typical pyramidal neuron in the mammalian brain

## makes 10,000 presynaptic connections with a wide range of target cells. It is therefore generally thought

that long-term memory storage should be synapse specific—that is, only those synapses that actively participate in learning should be enhanced. However, the finding that long-term facilitation involves gene expression—which occurs in the nucleus, far removed from a neuron's synapses—raises some fundamental questions regarding information storage. Is long-term memory storage indeed synapse specific, or do the gene products recruited during long-term memory storage alter the strength of every

presynaptic terminal in a neuron? And if long-term memory is synapse specific, what are the cellular mechanisms that enable the products of gene transcription to selectively strengthen just some synapses and not others? Kelsey Martin and her colleagues addressed these questions for long-term facilitation by using a cell culture system consisting of an isolated Aplysia sensory neu-

ron with a bifurcated axon that makes separate synaptic contacts with two motor neurons. The sensory

18/12/20 10:53 AM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Sensory

neuron

<!-- image -->

tion of the sensory to motor neuron synapses is consolidated

through the action of two distinct classes of small noncoding RNA molecules. miRNA-124 normally acts to suppress levels of the CREB-1 transcription factor by binding to its mRNA and inhibiting its translation. Serotonin (5-HT) downregulates miRNA-124 levels through a mechanism requiring mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK). This enhances the levels of CREB-1, promoting activation of CREB-1–dependent transcription of gene products necessary for memory consolidation. In a complementary pathway, 5-HT enhances with a delay the synthesis of several piRNAs, including piRNA-F, which bind to the Piwi protein. The piRNA-F/Piwi complex leads to enhanced methylation of the CREB-2 gene, resulting in long-lasting transcriptional repression of CREB-2 and decreased levels of CREB-2 protein. Because CREB-2 normally inhibits the action of CREB-1, the increased levels of piRNA-F in response to 5-HT enhance and prolong CREB-1 activity, resulting in more effective memory consolidation. induction of the hydrolase, approximately 25% of the

regulatory subunits are degraded in the sensory neu-

rons. As a result, free catalytic subunits can continue

to phosphorylate proteins important for the enhancement of transmitter release and the strengthening of synaptic connections, including CREB-1, long after

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1324

cAMP has returned to its resting level (Figure 53–6B).

Formation of a constitutively active enzyme is there-

fore the simplest molecular mechanism for long-term

memory. With repeated training, a second-messenger kinase critical for short-term facilitation can remain persistently active for up to 24 hours without requiring a continuous activating signal. The second and more enduring consequence of CREB-1 activation is the activation of the transcription factor C/EBP. This transcription factor forms both a

homodimer with itself and a heterodimer with another transcription factor called activating factor. Together, these factors act on downstream genes that trigger the growth of new synaptic connections that support longterm memory. With long-term sensitization, the number of presynaptic terminals in the sensory neurons in the gillwithdrawal circuit doubles (Figure 53–9). The dendrites

of the motor neurons also grow to accommodate the additional synaptic input. Thus, long-term structural changes in both post- and presynaptic cells increase the number of synapses. Long-term habituation, in contrast, leads to pruning of synaptic connections, as described above. Long-term disuse of functional connections between sensory and motor neurons reduces the number of terminals of each sensory neuron by one-third (Figure 53–9A). Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Is Synapse Specific

A typical pyramidal neuron in the mammalian brain

## makes 10,000 presynaptic connections with a wide range of target cells. It is therefore generally thought

that long-term memory storage should be synapse specific—that is, only those synapses that actively participate in learning should be enhanced. However, the finding that long-term facilitation involves gene expression—which occurs in the nucleus, far removed from a neuron's synapses—raises some fundamental questions regarding information storage. Is long-term memory storage indeed synapse specific, or do the gene products recruited during long-term memory storage alter the strength of every

presynaptic terminal in a neuron? And if long-term memory is synapse specific, what are the cellular mechanisms that enable the products of gene transcription to selectively strengthen just some synapses and not others? Kelsey Martin and her colleagues addressed these questions for long-term facilitation by using a cell culture system consisting of an isolated Aplysia sensory neu-

ron with a bifurcated axon that makes separate synaptic contacts with two motor neurons. The sensory

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

A Long-term anatomical changes


<!-- image -->

Figure 53–9 Long-term habituation and

sensitization involve structural changes

in the presynaptic terminals of sensory

neurons. A. Long-term habituation leads to a loss of synapses, and long-term sensitization leads to an increase in the number of

synapses. When measured either 1 day (shown here) or 1 week after training, the number of presynaptic terminals relative to control levels is greater in sensitized animals and less in habituated animals. The drawings below the graph illustrate changes in the number of synaptic contacts. The swellings or varicosities on the sensory neuron processes are called synaptic boutons; they contain all the specialized structures necessary for transmitter release. (Adapted, with permission, from Bailey and Chen 1983. Copyright © 1983 AAAS.) B. Fluorescence images of a sensory neuron axon contacting a motor neuron in culture before (left) and 1 day after (right)

five brief exposures to serotonin. The resulting increase in varicosities simulates the synaptic changes associated with long-term sensitization. Prior to serotonin application, no presynaptic varicosities are visible in the outlined area (left). After serotonin, several new boutons are apparent (arrows), some of which contain a fully developed active zone (asterisk) or have small immature active zones. Scale bar = 50 μm. (Reproduced, with permission, from Glanzman, Kandel, and Schacher 1990.)

neuron terminals on one of the two motor neurons

were activated by focal pulses of serotonin, thus mim-

icking the neural effects of a shock to the tail. When

only one pulse of serotonin was applied, those synapses showed short-term facilitation. The synapses on the second motor neuron, which did not receive serotonin, showed no change in synaptic transmission. When five pulses of serotonin were applied to the same synapses, those synapses displayed both short-term and long-term facilitation, and new synap-

tic connections were formed with the motor neuron. Although long-term facilitation and synaptic growth require gene transcription and protein synthesis, the

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1325

synapses that did not receive serotonin showed no

enhancement of synaptic transmission (Figure 53–10).

Thus, both short-term and long-term synaptic facilita-

tion are synapse specific and manifested only by those synapses that receive the modulatory serotonin signal. But how are the nuclear products able to enhance transmission at only certain synapses and not others of the same neuron? Are the newly synthesized proteins

somehow targeted to only those synapses that receive serotonin? Or are they shipped out to all synapses but used productively for the growth of new synaptic connections only at those synapses that have been marked by at least a single pulse of serotonin?

18/12/20 10:53 AM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A

Initiation Capture

Motor

neuron

<!-- image -->

A

SN

B

Motor

neuron

B

1 x 5-HT

2 Long-term facilitation

<!-- image -->

A

<!-- image -->

3 Capture of long-term facilitation

B

<!-- image -->

24 h

Cell B

<!-- image -->

Figure 53–10 The long-term facilitation of synaptic

24 h

Cell B

A

B

24 h

Cell B

<!-- image -->

B. 1. One pulse of 5-HT applied to the synapse with motor

transmission is synapse specific. (Adapted, with permission,

from Martin et al. 1997.)

A. The experiment uses a single presynaptic sensory neuron that contacts two postsynaptic motor neurons A and B. The pipette on the left is used to apply five pulses of serotonin

(5-HT) to a sensory neuron synapse with motor neuron A, initiating long-term facilitation at that synapse. The pipette on the right is used to apply one pulse of 5-HT to a sensory neuron synapse with motor neuron B, allowing this synapse to make use of (capture) new proteins produced in the cell body in response to the five pulses of 5-HT at the synapse with motor neuron A. The image at the right shows the actual appearance of the cells in culture.

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1326

neuron A produces only short-term (10-minute) facilitation of

the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the neuron.

By 24 hours, the EPSP has returned to its normal size. There is no significant change in EPSP size in cell B. 2. Application of five pulses of 5-HT to the synapses with cell A produces long-term (24-hour) facilitation of the EPSP in that cell but no change in the size of the EPSP in cell B. 3. When five pulses of 5-HT onto the synapse with cell A are paired with a single pulse of 5-HT onto the synapses with cell B, cell B now displays long-term facilitation and an increase in EPSP size after 24 hours.

1x

5-HT

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

To test this question, Martin and her colleagues

again selectively applied five pulses of serotonin to the

synapses made by the sensory neuron onto one of the

motor neurons. This time, however, the synapses with the second motor neuron were simultaneously activated by a single pulse of serotonin (which by itself produces only short-term synaptic facilitation lasting minutes). Under these conditions, the single pulse of serotonin was sufficient to induce long-term facilitation and growth of new synaptic connections at the contacts between the sensory neuron and the second motor neuron. Thus, application of the single pulse of serotonin onto the synapses at the second branch enabled those synapses to use the nuclear products produced in response to the five pulses of serotonin onto the synapses of the first branch, a process called capture . These results suggest that newly synthesized gene products, both mRNAs and proteins, are delivered by fast axonal transport to all the synapses of a neuron but

are functional only at synapses that have been marked by previous synaptic activity, that is, by presynaptic release of serotonin. Although one pulse of serotonin at a synapse is insufficient to turn on new gene expression in the cell body, it is sufficient to mark that synapse, allowing it to make use of new proteins generated in the cell body in response to five pulses of serotonin at another synapse. This idea, developed by Martin and her colleagues for Aplysia and independently by Frey and Morris for the hippocampus in rodents, is called synaptic capture or synaptic tagging. These findings raise the question, what is the nature of the synaptic mark that allows the capture of the gene products for long-term facilitation? When an

inhibitor of PKA was applied locally to the synapses receiving the single pulse of serotonin, those synapses could no longer capture the gene products produced in response to the five pulses of serotonin (Figure 53–11). This indicates that local phosphorylation by PKA is required for synaptic capture. In the early 1980s, Oswald Steward discovered that ribosomes, the machinery for protein synthesis, are present at synapses as well as in the cell body. Mar-

tin examined the importance of local protein synthesis in long-term synaptic facilitation by applying a single pulse of serotonin together with an inhibitor of local protein synthesis onto one set of synapses while simultaneously applying five pulses of serotonin to a second set of synapses. Normally, long-term facilitation and synaptic growth would persist for up to 72 hours in response to synaptic capture. In the presence of the local protein synthesis inhibitor, synaptic capture still occurred, producing long-term synaptic facilitation at

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1327


the synapses exposed to only one pulse of serotonin.

However, the facilitation only lasted 24 hours. After

24 hours, synaptic growth and facilitation at these syn-

apses collapsed, indicating that the maintenance of learning-induced synaptic growth requires new local protein synthesis at the synapse (Figure 53–11B). Martin and her colleagues thus found that regulation of protein synthesis at the synapse plays a major role in controlling synaptic strength at the sensory-to-

motor neuron connection in Aplysia. As we shall see in Chapter 54, local protein synthesis is also important for the later phases of long-term potentiation of synaptic strength in the hippocampus. These findings indicate there are two distinct components of synaptic marking in Aplysia. The first component, lasting about 24 hours, initiates long-term

synaptic plasticity and synaptic growth, requires transcription and translation in the nucleus, and recruits local PKA activity, but does not require local protein synthesis. The second component, which stabilizes the long-term synaptic change after 72 hours, requires local protein synthesis at the synapse. How might this local protein synthesis be regulated? Maintaining Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Requires a Prion-Like Protein Regulator of Local

Protein Synthesis

## The fact that mRNAs are translated at the synapse in response to marking of that synapse by one pulse of serotonin suggests that these mRNAs may initially

be dormant and under the control of a regulator of translation recruited by serotonin. Translation of most mRNAs requires that transcripts contain a long tail of adenosine nucleotides at their 3 ′ end [poly(A) tail]. Joel Richter had earlier found that in Xenopus (frog) oocytes the maternal mRNAs only have a short tail of adenine nucleotides and thus are silent until activated by the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB). CPEB binds to a site on mRNAs and recruits poly(A) polymerase, leading to the elongation of the poly(A) tail. Kausik Si and his colleagues found that serotonin increases the local synthesis of a novel, neuron-specific isoform of CPEB in Aplysia sensory neuron terminals.

The induction of CPEB is independent of transcription but requires new protein synthesis. Blocking CPEB locally at an activated synapse blocks the long-term maintenance of synaptic facilitation at the synapse but not its initiation and initial 24-hour maintenance. How might CPEB stabilize the late phase of longterm facilitation? Most biological molecules have a relatively short half-life (hours to days), whereas memory

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Figure 53–11 Long-term facilitation requires

both cyclic adenosine monophosphate

(cAMP)-dependent phosphorylation and local

protein synthesis. (Adapted, with permission, from Casadio et al. 1999.) A. Five pulses of serotonin (5-HT) are applied to the synapses on motor neuron A, and a single pulse is applied to those of cell B. Inhibitors of protein kinase

A (PKA; Rp-cAMPS) or local protein synthesis (emetine) are applied to synapses on cell B. B. Rp-cAMPS blocks the capture of long-term facilitation completely at the synapses on neuron B. Emetine has no effect on the capture of facilitation Initiation Motor neuron Capture Motor neuron

<!-- image -->


or the growth of new synaptic connections measured 24 hours after 5-HT application, but by 72 hours, it fully blocks synaptic enhancement. The outgrowth of new synaptic connections is retracted, and long-term facilitation decays after 1 day if capture is not maintained by local protein synthesis. (Abbreviations: EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential; Rp-cAMPS, Rp-diaster-eomer of adenosine cyclic 3 ′ ,5 ′ -phosphorothioate.)

<!-- image -->

lasts days, weeks, or even years. How can learning-


an aggregated form that is active. This switch depends

induced alterations in the molecular composition of

a synapse be maintained for such a long time? Most

hypotheses posit some type of self-sustained mechanism that modulates synaptic strength and structure. Si and his colleagues made the surprising discovery that the neuronal isoform of Aplysia CPEB appears to have self-sustaining properties that resemble those

of prion proteins. Prions were discovered by Stanley Prusiner, who demonstrated that these proteins were the causative agents of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a devastating neurodegenerative human disease, and mad cow disease. Prion proteins can exist in two forms: a soluble form and an aggregated form that is capable of self-perpetuation. Aplysia CPEB also has two conformational states, a soluble form that is inactive and

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1328

on an N-terminal domain of CPEB that is rich in glu-

tamine, similar to prion domains in other proteins.

In a naïve synapse, CPEB exists in the soluble, inactive state, and its resting level of expression is low. However, in response to serotonin, the local syn-

thesis of CPEB increases until a threshold concentra -tion is reached that switches CPEB to the aggregated, active state, which is then capable of activating the translation of dormant mRNAs. Once the active state is established, it becomes self-perpetuating by recruiting soluble CPEB to the aggregates, maintaining its ability to activate the translation of dormant mRNAs. Although dormant mRNAs are made in the cell body and distributed throughout the cell, they are translated only at synapses that have active CPEB aggregates.

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A

1 x 5-HT

PKA inhibitor

(Rp-cAMPS)

Local protein synthesis

inhibitor (Emetine)

+ Emetine Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality Whereas conventional prion mechanisms are pathogenic—the aggregated state of most prion pro- teins causes cell death—the Aplysia CPEB is a new form of a prion-like protein, one whose aggregated state Figure 53–12 A self-perpetuating switch for protein synthesis at axon terminals in Aplysia maintains long- Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1329

term synaptic facilitation. Five pulses of serotonin (5-HT) set up a signal that goes back to the nucleus to activate synthesis of mRNA. Newly transcribed mRNAs and newly synthesized proteins in the cell body are then sent to all terminals by fast axonal transport. However, only those terminals that have been marked by at least one pulse of serotonin can use the proteins to grow the new synapses needed for long-term facilitation. The marking of a terminal involves two substances: (1) protein kinase A (PKA), which is necessary for the immediate synaptic growth initiated by the proteins transported to the terminals, and (2) phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3 kinase), which initiates the local translation of mRNAs required to maintain synaptic growth and longterm facilitation past 24 hours. Some of the mRNAs at the terminals encode cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB), a regulator of local protein synthesis. In the basal state, CPEB is thought to exist in a largely inactive conformation as a soluble monomer that cannot bind to mRNAs. Through some as yet unspecified mechanism activated by serotonin and PI3 kinase, some copies of CPEB convert to an active conformation that forms aggregates. The aggregates function like prions in that they are able to recruit monomers to join the aggregate, thereby activating the monomers. The CPEB aggregates bind the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE) site of mRNAs. This binding recruits the poly(A) polymerase machinery and allows poly(A) tails of adenine nucleotides (A) to be added to dormant mRNAs. The polyadenylated mRNAs can now be recognized by ribosomes, allowing the translation of these mRNAs to several proteins. For example, in addition to CPEB, this leads to the local synthesis of N-actin and tubulin, which stabilize newly grown synaptic structures. (Model based on Bailey, Kandel, and Si 2004.)


plays an important physiological function. The active

self-perpetuating form of Aplysia CPEB maintains long-

term molecular changes in a synapse that are necessary

for the persistence of memory storage (Figure 53–12).

Sensory

neuron

CRE

Motor

neuron Motor neuron

<!-- image -->

1x

5-HT

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Memory Stored in a Sensory-Motor Synapse

Becomes Destabilized Following Retrieval but

Can Be Restabilized

## A variety of studies in mammals by Karim Nader and others have found that in its early stages long-term

memory storage is dynamic and can be disrupted.

In particular, a memory trace can become labile after retrieval and require an additional round of consolidation (so-called reconsolidation). Until recently, it was unclear whether the same set of synapses involved in storing a memory are destabilized and restabilized following retrieval or odor. Following training, a large fraction of wild type flies avoids the arm with the conditioned odor. Several fly mutants have been identified that do not learn to avoid the conditioned odor. These learning-defective mutants have been given imaginatively descriptive names such as dumb , dunce , rutabaga , amnesiac, and PKA-R1. Of great interest, all of these mutants have defects in the cAMP cascade. Olfactory conditioning depends on a region of the fly brain called the mushroom bodies. Neurons of the mushroom bodies, called Kenyon cells, receive olfac-

whether, after synaptic reactivation following a memory, a new set of synapses is regulated. This question was examined for retrieval of long-term sensitization of the gill- and siphon-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia These experiments revealed that a retrieved memory becomes labile as a result of ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation and is then reconsolidated by means new protein synthesis. Does a similar reconsolidation mechanism occur at sensory-motor synapses that have undergone longterm facilitation? Indeed, when a synapse that has

undergone long-term facilitation is reactivated by a brief burst of presynaptic action potentials, that synapse becomes destabilized through protein degradation and requires protein synthesis for restabilization. Such results suggest that reconsolidation of memory involves restabilization of synaptic facilitation at the same synapses at which the initial memory was stored. Classical Threat Conditioning of Defensive

. tory input from the antennal lobes, structures similar to the olfactory lobes of the mammalian brain. The Kenyon cells also receive input from dopaminergic neurons that respond to aversive stimuli, such as a foot shock. The dopamine binds to a metabotropic receptor (encoded by the dumb gene) that activates a stimulatory G protein and a specific type of Ca 2+ /calmodulindependent adenylyl cyclase (encoded by the rutabaga gene), similar to the cyclase involved in classical conditioning in Aplysia. The convergent action of dopamine released by the unconditioned stimulus (foot shock) and a rise in intracellular Ca 2+ triggered by olfactory input leads to the synergistic activation of adenylyl cyclase, producing a large increase in cAMP. Recent experiments have demonstrated that flies can be classically conditioned when an odorant is paired with direct stimulation of the dopaminergic

Responses in Flies Also Uses the

cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway

## Do the cellular mechanisms for implicit memory storage found in Aplysia have parallels in other animals?

Studies on aversive learning indicate that the same

mechanisms are also used to store memory in the fruit fly Drosophila and in rodents, indicating conserved mechanisms throughout Metazoan evolution. The fruit fly is particularly convenient for the study of implicit memory storage because its genome is easily manipulated and, as first demonstrated by Seymour Benzer and his colleagues, the fly can be classically conditioned. In a typical classical conditioning paradigm, an odor is paired with repeated electrical shocks to the feet. The extent of learning is then examined by allowing the flies to choose between two arms of a maze, where one arm contains the odor that had been paired with a shock and the other arm contains an unpaired

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1330

neurons, bypassing the foot shock. In these experiments, the mammalian P2X receptor (an adenosine triphosphate [ATP]-gated cation channel) is expressed as a transgene in the dopaminergic neurons. The flies are then injected with a caged derivative of ATP. The dopaminergic neurons can then be excited to fire action potentials by shining light on the flies to release ATP from its cage and activate the P2X receptors. When the dopaminergic neurons are activated in this manner in the presence of an odor, the flies undergo aversive conditioning—they learn to avoid the odor. Thus, the unconditioned stimulus activates a dopamine signal that reinforces aversive conditioning, much as serotonin acts as an aversive reinforcement signal for learned defensive responses in Aplysia. A reverse genetic approach has also been used to explore memory formation in Drosophila. In these experiments, various transgenes are placed under the

control of a promoter that is heat sensitive. The heat sensitivity permits the gene to be turned on at will by elevating the temperature of the chamber housing the flies. This was done in mature animals to minimize any potential effect on the development of the brain. When the catalytic subunit of PKA was blocked by transient expression of an inhibitory transgene, flies were unable

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

to form short-term memory, indicating the importance

of the cAMP signal transduction pathway for associa-

tive learning and short-term memory in Drosophila.

Long-term memory in Drosophila requires new protein synthesis just as in Aplysia and other animals. Knockout of a CREB activator gene selectively blocks

long-term memory without interfering with shortterm memory. Conversely, when the gene is overexpressed, a training procedure that ordinarily produces only short-term memory produces long-term memory. As in Aplysia, certain forms of long-term memory in Drosophila also involve CPEB and may depend on prion-like behavior in this protein. Male flies learn to

suppress their courtship behavior after exposure to unreceptive females. When the N-terminal domain of CPEB is deleted genetically, there is a loss of long-term courtship memory; the male fly fails to recognize the unreceptive female. This N-terminal domain is rich in glutamine residues and corresponds to the glutamine rich prion-like domain of CPEB in Aplysia. Thus several molecular mechanisms involved in implicit memory are conserved from Aplysia to flies, and as we will see next, this conservation extends to mammals. Memory of Threat Learning in Mammals

Involves the Amygdala

## Research over the past several decades has resulted in a detailed understanding of the neural circuits for

both innate and learned defensive responses to threats

Figure 53–13 Threat learning engages parallel pathways from the thalamus to the amygdala.  The signal in mammals, often referred to as "fear learning." In

## for the conditioned stimulus, here a neutral tone, is carried by two pathways

from the auditory thalamus to the lateral nucleus of the amygdala: by a direct pathway and by an indirect pathway via the auditory cortex. Similarly, the signal for the unconditioned stimulus, here a shock, is conveyed through parallel nociceptive pathways from the somatosensory part of the thalamus to the lateral nucleus, one a direct pathway and one an indirect pathway via the somatosensory cortex. The lateral nucleus in turn projects to the central nucleus, the output nucleus of the amygdala, which activates neural circuits that increase heart rate, produce other autonomic changes, and elicit defensive behaviors that constitute the defensive state. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kandel 2006.)

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1331


particular, as we have noted in Chapter 42, both types

of defensive responses crucially involve the amygdala,

which participates in the detection and evaluation of a

broad range of significant and potentially dangerous environmental stimuli. The amygdala-based defense system quickly learns about new dangers. It can associate a new neutral stimulus (conditioned stimulus) with a known threat (unconditioned stimulus) after a single paired exposure, and this learned association is often retained throughout life. The amygdala receives information about threats directly from sensory systems. The input nucleus of the amygdala, the lateral nucleus, is the site of conver-

gence for signals from both unconditioned and conditioned stimuli. Both signals are carried by a rapid pathway that goes directly from the thalamus to the amygdala and a slower indirect pathway that projects from the thalamus to sensory areas of neocortex and from there to the amygdala. These parallel pathways both contribute to conditioning (Figure 53–13). The amygdala also receives higher-order cognitive information by means of connections from cortical associational areas, especially medial cortical regions in the frontal and temporal lobes. During Pavlovian conditioning, the strength of synaptic transmission is modified in the amygdala. In response to a tone, an extracellular electrophysi-

ological signal proportional to the excitatory synaptic response is recorded in the lateral nucleus. Following pairing of the tone with a shock, the electrophysiological response to the tone is enhanced by an increase in synaptic transmission, which depends on the

Auditory

cortex Indirect Fear responses

<!-- image -->

18/12/20 10:53 AM


A

Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Training Behavioral testing Electrophysiological testing

(lateral nucleus of the amygdala)

Tone Field EPSP

20 ms

As a result, the tone alone will elicit what the shock previously

<!-- image -->

A. An animal ordinarily ignores a neutral tone. The tone produces

a small synaptic response in the amygdala recorded by an extracellular field electrode. This field excitatory postsynaptic potential

(field EPSP) is generated by the small voltage drop between the recording electrode in the amygdala and a second electrode on the exterior of the brain as excitatory synaptic current enters the dendrites of a large population of amygdala neurons. convergence of the tone (conditioned stimulus) and

the shock (unconditioned stimulus) onto single neu-

rons in the lateral amygdala (Figure 53–14).

It is generally thought that behavioral learning depends on synaptic plasticity. In an effort to understand how such plasticity might occur during learning

in the lateral amygdala, researchers have studied longterm potentiation (LTP), a cellular model of plasticity. We initially discussed LTP in connection with excitatory synapse function in Chapter 13 and will examine it in detail in Chapter 54 in connection with explicit memory and the hippocampus. In brain slices that include the lateral amygdala, LTP can be induced by high-frequency tetanic stimulation of either the direct or indirect sensory pathways, which produces a longlasting increase in the excitatory postsynaptic response to these inputs. This change results from a form of homosynaptic plasticity (Figure 53–15). Long-term potentiation in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala is triggered by Ca 2+ influx into the postsynaptic neurons in response to strong synaptic activ larization to relieve this blockade (Chapter 13). L-type channels also require a strong depolarization to open.

elicited: It causes the mouse to freeze, an instinctive defense response. After threat conditioning, the electrophysiological response in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala to the tone is greater than the response prior to conditioning. (Abbreviations: CS, conditioned stimulus; US, unconditioned stimulus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Rogan et al. 2005.) synaptic input to generate enough postsynaptic depo-

Thus, LTP is only generated in response to coincident synaptic activity. Calcium influx triggers a biochemical cascade that enhances synaptic transmission through both the insertion of additional α-amino-3-hydroxy-5methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)-type glutamate receptors in the postsynaptic membrane and an increase in transmitter release from the presynaptic terminals. As in Aplysia, monoamine neurotransmitters, such as norepinephrine and dopamine, released during tetanic stimulation provide a heterosynaptic modulatory signal that contributes to the induction of LTP. Studies in awake behaving rodents indicate that similar mechanisms contribute to the acquisition of Pavlovian threat conditioning. This form of learning

-requires postsynaptic NMDA receptors and voltagegated calcium channels in the lateral amygdala, and it is enhanced by norepinephrine released in lateral amygdala from the locus ceruleus. In addition, the size of the LTP elicited by electrical stimulation in slices of the amygdala from animals previously trained is less than that found in

slices from untrained animals. Because there is an upper limit to the amount by which synapses can be

18/12/20 10:53 AM

ity. The Ca 2+ entry is mediated by the opening of both N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors and L-type voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels in the postsynaptic cell. Because NMDA receptors are normally blocked by extracellular Mg 2+ , they require a large

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1332

20 µV

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

A Basolateral complex of the amygdala

<!-- image -->

Figure 53–15 Long-term potentiation at synapses in

the amygdala may mediate threat conditioning.

A. A coronal brain slice from a mouse shows the posi-

tion of the amygdala. The enlargement shows three key input nuclei of the amygdala—lateral (LA), baso-

lateral (BL), and basomedial (BM)—which together form the basolateral complex. These nuclei project to the central nucleus, which projects to the hypothalamus and brain stem. (Adapted, with permission, from Maren 1999. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier.) B. High-frequency tetanic stimulation of the direct or indirect pathway from the thalamus to the lateral nucleus initiates long-term potentiation (LTP). The

drawing shows the position of the extracellular voltage recording electrode in the lateral nucleus, and the positions of two stimulating electrodes used to activate either the direct pathway or indirect pathway. The plot shows the amplitude of the extracellular field excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in response to stimulation of the indirect cortical pathway during the time course of the experiment. When a pathway is stimulated at a low frequency (once every 30 seconds), the field EPSP is stable. However, when five trains of high-frequency tetanic stimulation are applied (asterisks), the response is enhanced for a period of hours. The facilitation depends on protein kinase A (PKA) and is compromised when the PKA inhibitor KT5720 is applied (the bar). Field EPSPs before and after induction of LTP are also shown. (Adapted, with permission, from Huang and Kandel 1998; Huang, Martin, and Kandel 2000.)

potentiated, this result is taken as evidence that threat

conditioning recruits LTP, which precludes further

180 210

interferes both with threat conditioning and the induc-

tion of LTP in pathways that transmit the conditioned

LTP in response to electrical stimulation. Thus, artifi-

cially induced LTP and behaviorally induced LTP are closely related. Two types of genetic experiments also strongly support the idea that an LTP-like phenomenon contributes to the cellular mechanism for storing the

memory of a learned threat. First, genetic disruption of the GluN2B (NR2B) subunit of the NMDA receptor

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1333

stimulus signal to the lateral amygdala. Moreover, this

mutation affects only learned threats; it does not affect responses to unconditioned threats or routine synaptic transmission. Conversely, overexpression of the GluN2B subunit facilitates learning. Similarly, disruption of CREB signaling, a step downstream from Ca 2+ influx, interferes with conditioning, whereas enhancement of CREB activity facilitates learning.

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Before

induction

of LTP

Field

EPSPs

0.5 mV

PKA

active

PKA

inhibited
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

A Basolateral complex of the amygdala

<!-- image -->

Figure 53–15 Long-term potentiation at synapses in

the amygdala may mediate threat conditioning.

A. A coronal brain slice from a mouse shows the posi-

tion of the amygdala. The enlargement shows three key input nuclei of the amygdala—lateral (LA), baso-

lateral (BL), and basomedial (BM)—which together form the basolateral complex. These nuclei project to the central nucleus, which projects to the hypothalamus and brain stem. (Adapted, with permission, from Maren 1999. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier.) B. High-frequency tetanic stimulation of the direct or indirect pathway from the thalamus to the lateral nucleus initiates long-term potentiation (LTP). The

drawing shows the position of the extracellular voltage recording electrode in the lateral nucleus, and the positions of two stimulating electrodes used to activate either the direct pathway or indirect pathway. The plot shows the amplitude of the extracellular field excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in response to stimulation of the indirect cortical pathway during the time course of the experiment. When a pathway is stimulated at a low frequency (once every 30 seconds), the field EPSP is stable. However, when five trains of high-frequency tetanic stimulation are applied (asterisks), the response is enhanced for a period of hours. The facilitation depends on protein kinase A (PKA) and is compromised when the PKA inhibitor KT5720 is applied (the bar). Field EPSPs before and after induction of LTP are also shown. (Adapted, with permission, from Huang and Kandel 1998; Huang, Martin, and Kandel 2000.)

potentiated, this result is taken as evidence that threat

conditioning recruits LTP, which precludes further

180 210

interferes both with threat conditioning and the induc-

tion of LTP in pathways that transmit the conditioned

LTP in response to electrical stimulation. Thus, artifi-

cially induced LTP and behaviorally induced LTP are closely related. Two types of genetic experiments also strongly support the idea that an LTP-like phenomenon contributes to the cellular mechanism for storing the

memory of a learned threat. First, genetic disruption of the GluN2B (NR2B) subunit of the NMDA receptor

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1333

stimulus signal to the lateral amygdala. Moreover, this

mutation affects only learned threats; it does not affect responses to unconditioned threats or routine synaptic transmission. Conversely, overexpression of the GluN2B subunit facilitates learning. Similarly, disruption of CREB signaling, a step downstream from Ca 2+ influx, interferes with conditioning, whereas enhancement of CREB activity facilitates learning.

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Before

induction

of LTP

Field

EPSPs

0.5 mV

PKA

active

PKA

inhibited



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Does the LTP important for threat learning involve

insertion of new AMPA receptors, as observed in brain

slices? To address this question, researchers infected

pyramidal neurons in the lateral nucleus with a genetically engineered virus that did not damage the neurons but caused them to express AMPA receptors tagged with a fluorescent label. Threat conditioning led to an increase in insertion of the tagged AMPA receptors into the cell membrane, similar to what is seen during experimentally induced LTP in brain slices. When a different virus was used to express a C-terminal portion of the AMPA receptor that competes with and prevents the insertion of endogenous AMPA receptors, memory for learned threat was substantially reduced, even though the virus infected only 10% to 20% of the neurons in the lateral nucleus. This surprising result suggests that LTP needs to be induced at nearly all activated synapses to effectively support threat learning. One of the virtues of the Pavlovian paradigm is its amenability to experimental study due to the fact that specific stimuli are transmitted to the amygdala

by known pathways. This has allowed experimenters to directly activate conditioned stimulus or unconditioned stimulus pathways, bypassing the normal sensory input. Such studies have provided convincing evidence implicating these pathways to the amygdala in threat learning. Based on these findings, researchers explored whether threat learning could be induced when they paired an auditory conditioned stimulus (tone) with

direct depolarization of lateral amygdala neurons, instead of using an external, pain-eliciting unconditioned shock stimulus to produce the depolarization via the unconditioned stimulus pathway to the lateral amygdala. To accomplish this, they used an optogenetic approach (Chapter 5). They injected a virus into the amygdala to express channelrhodopsin-2, a lightactivated excitatory cation channel, in lateral amygdala neurons. Following pairing of the auditory stimulus with a light pulse that depolarized lateral amygdala cells, presentation of the tone alone elicited conditioned freezing. The amount of freezing was greater when norepinephrine was present, which is further evidence that modulatory pathways also have a role in synaptic facilitation in this circuit. Thus, an aversive shock itself is not necessary to induce threat learning. Rather, it is the association of a stimulus with activa tion of the lateral amygdala that is key. Other studies demonstrated the possibility of artificially manipulating the amygdala to impair as well as to instantiate, threat memory. They first trained ani- delivered a pattern of optogenetic stimulation that generated long-term depression (LTD) of the auditory input to the amygdala, a form of synaptic plasticity in which weak, repetitive stimulation decreases the strength of synaptic transmission. Induction of LTD was able to inactivate the memory of the shock. Then, using a pattern of optical stimulation that produced LTP of the same auditory input, they found that the memory of the shock could be reinstated. The findings that inactivation and reactivation of a memory could be engineered using LTD and LTP strengthened the possible causal link between synaptic strength and behavioral memory storage. The persistence of the synaptic changes underlying the memory for a threat depend on gene expression and protein synthesis in the amygdala, much like long-term memory in Aplysia and Drosophila. Thus, cAMP-dependent protein kinase and MAPK activate the transcription factor CREB to initiate gene expression. The importance of CREB is underscored by the finding that different neurons in the lateral amygdala have varying levels of CREB expression prior to threat conditioning. Neurons that express a larger than average amount of CREB are selectively recruited during learning. Conversely, if neurons with a large resting level of CREB are selectively ablated after learning, memory is impaired. While most of the work on the neural mechanisms of threat conditioning has involved the lateral nucleus of the amygdala, in recent years, evidence has accumu- lated that plasticity in the central nucleus is also important. The central nucleus receives direct and indirect inputs from the lateral nucleus and forms synaptic connections with neurons in the periaqueductal gray region in the midbrain, which projects to the brain stem to control a number of defensive reactions, including freezing behavior. Within a lateral cell group of the central nucleus, inhibitory cells called PKC delta neurons control the activity of the output neurons in the medial cell group that project to the periaqueductal gray. Memory for threat conditioning in humans also involves the amygdala. Thus, in humans, damage to the amygdala impairs the implicit memory of threat

-conditioning but not the explicit memory of having been conditioned. Functional imaging studies have found that the amygdala is activated by threats even when the person is not aware of the presence of the threat because the stimulus was subliminal. Although human studies are limited in their ability to reveal neurobiological details, they demonstrate the relevance of the animal work for human psychopathology. In summary, Pavlovian threat conditioning has emerged as one of the most useful experimental

18/12/20 10:53 AM

mals to associate a foot shock with optogenetic stimulation of auditory inputs to the amygdala. They then

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1334

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

A Monkey training

Figure 53–16 Training expands

representation of inputs from the

fingers in the cortex.

A. A monkey was trained for 1 hour per day to perform a task that required repeated use of the

tips of fingers 2, 3, and occasionally 4. After training, the portion of area 3b of the somatosensory cortex representing the tips of the stimulated fingers (dark color) is substantially greater than normal (measured 3 months prior to training). (Adapted, with permission, from Jenkins et al. 1990.) B. 1. A human subject trained to do a rapid sequence of finger movements will improve in accuracy and

- speed after 3 weeks of daily training (10–20 minutes each day). Functional magnetic resonance imaging scans of the primary motor cortex (based on local blood oxygenation level–dependent signals) after training show that the region activated in trained subjects (orange region) is larger than the region activated in untrained (controls). The control subjects received no training and performed unlearned finger movements using the same hand as control subjects. The change in cortical representation in trained subjects persisted for several months. (Reproduced, with permission, from Karni et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 National Academy of Sciences.) 2. The size of the cortical representation of the fifth finger of the left hand is greater in string players than
- in nonmusicians. The graph plots the dipole strength obtained from magnetoencephalography, a measure of neural activity. The increase is most pronounced in musicians that began musical training before age 13. (Reproduced, with permission, from Elbert et al. 1995. Copyright © 1995 AAAS.)

<!-- image -->


1 Acquisition of a motor skill in adulthood

Control

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

Trained

<!-- image -->

Controls



<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1335

String players

Area 3b





1 mm

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

models for studying associative learning and memory

in the mammalian brain. In part, this is due to the fact

that the behavioral paradigm has been applied suc-

cessfully across diverse species, from flies to humans, and thus builds upon the earlier progress that invertebrate models have made. Learning-Induced Changes in the Structure

of the Brain Contribute to the Biological Basis

of Individuality

## To what extent do the anatomical alterations in synapses required for long-term memory storage alter the

large-scale functional architecture of the mature brain?

The answer is well illustrated by the fact that the maps of the body surface in the primary somatic sensory cortex differ among individuals in a manner that reflects their use of specific sensory pathways. This remarkable finding results from the expansion or retraction of the connections of sensory pathways in the cortex according to the specific experience of the individual (Chapter 49). The reorganization of afferent inputs as a result of behavior is also evident at lower levels in the brain, specifically at the level of the dorsal column nuclei,

which contain the first synapses of the somatic sensory system. Therefore, organizational changes probably occur throughout the somatic afferent pathway. The process by which experience alters the maps of somatosensory inputs in the cortex is illustrated in an experiment in which adult monkeys were trained to

use their middle three fingers at the expense of other fingers to obtain food. After several thousand trials of this behavior, the area of cortex devoted to the middle fingers expanded greatly (Figure 53–16A). Thus, practice may expand synaptic connections by strengthening the effectiveness of existing connections. The normal development of somatosensory input to cortical neurons may depend on the level of activity in neighboring afferent axons. In one experiment

using monkeys, the skin surfaces of two adjacent fingers were surgically connected so that the connected fingers were always used together, thus ensuring that their afferent somatosensory axons were normally coactivated. As a result, the normally sharp discontinuity between the zones in the somatosensory cortex that receive inputs from these digits was abolished. Thus, normal development of the boundaries of representation of adjacent fingers in the cortex may be guided not only genetically but also through experience. Fine tuning of cortical connections may depend on associative mechanisms such as LTP, similar to the

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1336

role of cooperative activity in shaping the develop-

ment of ocular dominance columns in the visual sys-

tem (Chapter 49).

This plasticity is evident in humans as well. People trained to perform a task with their fingers show an expansion in the fMRI signal in the primary motor

cortex during performance of the task (Figure 53–16B). Thomas Elbert explored the hand representation in the motor cortex of string instrument players. These musicians use their left hand for fingering the strings, manipulating the fingers in a highly individuated way. By contrast, the right hand, used for bowing, is used almost like a fist. The representation of the right hand in the cortex of string instrument players is the same as that of nonmusicians. But the representation of the left hand is greater than in nonmusicians and substantially more prominent in players who started to play their instrument prior to age 13 years (Figure 53–16B). Because each of us is brought up in a somewhat different environment, experiencing different combinations of stimuli and developing motor skills in

different ways, each individual's brain is uniquely modified. This distinctive modification of brain archi -tecture, along with a unique genetic makeup, constitutes a biological basis for individuality. Highlights

1. Many aspects of personality are guided by implicit

memory. A great deal of what we experience—

what we perceive, think, fantasize—is not directly

- controlled by conscious thought. 2. In mammals, both innate and learned defensive responses involve the amygdala. The amygdalabased defense system quickly learns about new
- dangers. It can associate a new neutral (conditioned) stimulus with a known threatening (unconditioned) stimulus on a single paired exposure, and this learned association is often retained throughout life. 3. During Pavlovian conditioning, the strength of synaptic transmission is modified in the lateral amygdala by pairing the conditioned and uncon-
- ditioned stimuli. As a result, electrophysiological responses of neurons in the lateral amygdala are enhanced and behavioral learning occurs. 4. Many of the molecular mechanisms underlying threat conditioning in invertebrates also contribute to conditioning in mammals.
5. Damage to the human amygdala impairs implicit threat conditioning but does not affect the explicit memory of having been conditioned.

18/12/20 10:53 AM

Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality

6. Habits are routines that are acquired gradually

by repetition and are the result of a distinct form

of implicit learning. As with all forms of implicit

- learning, habits are expressed in action alone, without conscious control, and independent of verbal reports. 7. As these arguments make clear, the empirical study of unconscious psychic processes was severely limited for many years by the lack of suit-
- able experimental methods. Today, however, biology has a wide range of empirical methods that are providing cellular and molecular insights that are expanding our understanding of a wide range of mental activities.

Joseph LeDoux


Phelps EA. 2006. Emotion and cognition: insights from

studies of the human amygdala. Annu Rev Psychol 57:

27–53.

- Tubon CT Jr, Yin JCP. 2008. CREB responsive transcription and memory formation. In: SM Dudek (ed). Transcrip -tional Regulation by Neuronal Activity, Part III, pp. 377–397.
- New York: Springer. References Bailey CH, Chen MC. 1983. Morphological basis of long-

term habituation and sensitization in Aplysia. Science

220:91–93.

- Bailey CH, Kandel ER, Si K. 2004. The persistence of long-term memory: a molecular approach to self-sustaining changes in learning-induced synaptic growth. Neuron 44:49–57.
- Bear MF, Connors BW, Paradiso MA. 2001. Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain, 2nd ed. Chicago: Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins.
- Eric R. Kandel Casadio A, Martin KC, Giustetto M, et al. 1999. A transient, neuron-wide form of CREB-mediated long-term facilitation can be stabilized at specific synapses by local protein
- synthesis. Cell 99:221–237. Castellucci VF, Carew TJ, Kandel ER. 1978. Cellular analysis of long-term habituation of the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia californica. Science 202:1306–1308.
- Castellucci VF, Kandel ER. 1974. A quantal analysis of the synaptic depression underlying habituation of the gillwithdrawal reflex in Aplysia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 71:5004–5008. Claridge-Chang A, Roorda RD, Vrontou E, et al. 2009. Writing memories with light-addressable reinforcement circuitry. Cell 139:405–415.
- Ehrlich DE, Josselyn SA. 2016. Plasticity-related genes in brain development and amygdala-dependent learning. Genes Brain Behav 15:125–143.
- Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. 2001. From Conditioning to Conscious Recollection: Memory Systems of the Brain. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Elbert T, Pantev C, Wienbruch C, Rockstroh B, Taub E. 1995. Increased cortical representation of the fingers of the left hand in string players. Science 270:305–307.
- Glanzman DL, Kandel ER, Schacher S. 1990. Target-dependent structural changes accompanying long-term synaptic facilitation in Aplysia neurons. Science 249:799–802.
- Greco JA, Liberzon I. 2016. Neuroimaging of fear-associated learning. Neuropsychopharmacology 41:320–334. Gründemann J, Lüthi A. 2015. Ensemble coding in amygdala

Selected Reading

Alberini CM, Kandel ER. 2016. The regulation of transcrip-

tion in memory consolidation. In: ER Kandel, Y Dudai,

MR Mayford (eds). Learning and Memory, pp. 157–174.

- New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. Bailey CH, Kandel ER, Harris KM. 2015. Structural components of synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7:a021758.
- Busto GU, Cervantes-Sandoval I, Davis RL. 2010. Olfactory learning in Drosophila. Physiology (Bethesda) 25:338–346. Duvarci S, Pare D. 2014. Amygdala microcircuits controlling
- learned fear. Neuron 82:966–980. Fanselow MS, Zelikowsky M, Perusini J, Barrera VR,
- Hersman S. 2014. Isomorphisms between psychological processes and neural mechanisms: from stimulus elements
- to genetic markers of activity. Neurobiol Learn Mem 108:5–13. Hawkins RD, Kandel ER, Bailey CH. 2006. Molecular mechanisms of memory storage in Aplysia. Biol Bull 210: 174–191.
- LeDoux JE. 2014. Coming to terms with fear. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:2871–2878. LeDoux J. 2015. Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and
- circuits for associative learning. Curr Opin Neurobiol 35:200–206.
- Treat Fear and Anxiety. New York: Viking. LeDoux JE. 2019. The Deep History of Ourselves: The Four-
- Billion Year History of How We Got Conscious Brains New York: Viking.
- . Guan Z, Giustetto M, Lomvardas S, et al. 2002. Integration of long-term–memory-related synaptic plasticity involves bidirectional regulation of gene expression and chromatin
- Nader K. 2016. Reconsolidation and the dynamic nature of memory. In: ER Kandel, Y Dudai, MR Mayford (eds). Learning and Memory, pp. 245–260. New York: Cold Spring
- Harbor Laboratory Press.

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1337

- structure. Cell 111:483–493. Hawkins RD, Abrams TW, Carew TJ, Kandel ER. 1983. A cellular mechanism of classical conditioning in Aplysia: activity-dependent amplification of presynaptic facilita-
- tion. Science 219:400–405.

18/12/20 10:53 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Hegde AN, Inokuchi K, Pei W, et al. 1997. Ubiquitin C-terminal

hydrolase is an immediate-early gene essential for long-

term facilitation in Aplysia. Cell 89:115–126.

- Herry C, Johansen JP. 2014. Encoding of fear learning and memory in distributed neuronal circuits. Nat Neurosci 17:1644–1654.
- Huang YY, Kandel ER. 1998. Postsynaptic induction and PKA-dependent expression of LTP in the lateral amygdala. Neuron 21:169–178.
- Huang YY, Martin KC, Kandel ER. 2000. Both protein kinase A and mitogen-activated protein kinase are required in the amygdala for the macromolecular synthesis-dependent late
- phase of long-term potentiation. J Neurosci 20:6317–6325. Janak PH, Tye KM. 2015. From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature 517:284–292. Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM, Ochs MT, Allard T, Guic-Robles
- E. 1990. Functional reorganization of primary somatosensory cortex in adult owl monkeys after behaviorally con-
- trolled tactile stimulation. J Neurophysiol 63:82–104. Johansen JP, Diaz-Mataix L, Hamanaka H, et al. 2014. Hebbian and neuromodulatory mechanisms interact to trigger associative memory formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 111:E5584–E5592. Kandel ER. 2001. The molecular biology of memory storage: a dialogue between genes and synapses. Science 294:1030–1038.
- Kandel ER. 2006. In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind. New York: Norton. Karni A, Meyer G, Rey-Hipolito C, et al. 1998. The acquisi-
- tion of skilled motor performance: fast and slow experience-driven changes in primary motor cortex. Proc Natl
- Acad Sci U S A 95:861–868. Keleman K, Krüttner S, Alenius M, Dickson BJ. 2007. Function of the Drosophila CPEB protein Orb2 in long-term courtship memory. Nat Neurosci 10:1587–1593.
- Klein M, Kandel ER. 1980. Mechanism of calcium current modulation underlying presynaptic facilitation and behavioral sensitization in Aplysia. Proc Natl Acad Sci
- U S A 77:6912–6916. Krabbe S, Gründemann J, Lüthi A. 2018. Amygdala inhibitory circuits regulate associative fear conditioning. Biol Psychiatry 83:800–809.
- Mahan AL, Ressler KJ. 2011. Fear conditioning, synaptic plasticity and the amygdala: implications for posttraumatic stress disorder. Trends Neurosci 35:24–35.
- Maren S. 2017. Synapse-specific encoding of fear memory in the amygdala. Neuron 95:988–990.

Kandel-Ch53\_1312-1338.indd 1338

Maren S. 1999. Long-term potentiation in the amygdala: a

mechanism for emotional learning and memory. Trends

Neurosci 22:561–567.

- Martin KC, Casadio A, Zhu H, et al. 1997. Synapse-specific, longterm facilitation of Aplysia sensory to motor synapses: a function for local protein synthesis in memory storage.
- Cell 91:927–938. Nabavi S, Fox R, Proulx CD, Lin JY, Tsien RY, Malinow R. 2014. Engineering a memory with LTD and LTP. Nature 511:348–352.
- Pape HC, Pare D. 2010. Plastic synaptic networks of the amygdala for the acquisition, expression, and extinction of conditioned fear. Physiol Rev 90:419–463.
- Pavlov IP. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of the Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. GV Anrep (transl). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Pinsker H, Kupferman I, Castelucci V, Kandel ER. 1970. Habituation and dishabituation of the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia. Science 167:1740–1742.
- Rajasethupathy P, Antonov I, Sheridan R, et al. 2012. A role for neuronal piRNAs in the epigenetic control of memoryrelated synaptic plasticity. Cell 149:693–707.
- Rogan MT, Leon KS, Perez DL, Kandel ER. 2005. Distinct neural signatures for safety and danger in the amygdala and striatum of the mouse. Neuron 46:309–320.
- Sears RM, Fink AE, Wigestrand MB, Farb CR, de Lecea L, LeDoux JE. 2013. Orexin/hypocretin system modulates amygdala-dependent treat learning trough the locus coer-
- uleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:20260–20265. Sears RM, Schiff HC, LeDoux JE. 2014. Molecular mechanisms of threat learning in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 122:263–304.
- Si K, Giustetto M, Etkin A, et al. 2003. A neuronal isoform of CPEB regulates local protein synthesis and stabilizes synapse-specific long-term facilitation in Aplysia. Cell
- 115:893–904. Si K, Lindquist S, Kandel ER. 2003. A neuronal isoform of the Aplysia CPEB has prion-like properties. Cell 115:879–891. Spencer AW, Thompson RF, Nielson DR Jr. 1966. Response
- decrement of the flexion reflex in the acute spinal cat and transient restoration by strong stimuli. J Neurophysiol
- 29:240–252. Squire LR, Kandel ER. 2008. Memory: From Mind to Molecules , 2nd ed. Greenwood Village: Roberts. Yin JCP, Wallach JS, Del Vecchio M, et al. 1994. Induction of
- a dominant negative CREB transgene specifically blocks long-term memory in Drosophila. Cell 79:49–58.

18/12/20 10:53 AM


The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis

## of Explicit Memory Storage

Explicit Memory in Mammals Involves Synaptic Plasticity in

the Hippocampus

Long-Term Potentiation at Distinct Hippocampal

## Pathways Is Essential for Explicit Memory Storage Different Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Contribute

to the Forms of Expression of Long-Term Potentiation Long-Term Potentiation Has Early and Late Phases

Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity Provides a More Natural Mechanism for Altering Synaptic Strength

Long-Term Potentiation in the Hippocampus Has

Properties That Make It Useful as A Mechanism for Memory Storage

Spatial Memory Depends on Long-Term Potentiation Explicit Memory Storage Also Depends on Long-Term Depression of Synaptic Transmission

Memory Is Stored in Cell Assemblies

Different Aspects of Explicit Memory Are Processed in Different Subregions of the Hippocampus

The Dentate Gyrus Is Important for Pattern Separation

The CA3 Region Is Important for Pattern Completion

The CA2 Region Encodes Social Memory

A Spatial Map of the External World Is Formed in the Hippocampus

Entorhinal Cortex Neurons Provide a Distinct

## Representation of Space Place Cells Are Part of the Substrate for Spatial Memory

Disorders of Autobiographical Memory Result From Functional Perturbations in the Hippocampus

Highlights

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1339

E

xplicit memory—the conscious recall of infor

-

mation about people, places, objects, and events—

is what people commonly think of as memory.

Sometimes called declarative memory, it binds our mental life together by allowing us to recall at will what we ate for breakfast, where we ate it, and with whom. It allows us to join what we did today with what we did yesterday or the week or month before that. Two structures in the mammalian brain are particularly critical for encoding and storing explicit memory: the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus

(Chapter 52). The prefrontal cortex mediates working memory, which can be actively maintained for only very short periods and is then rapidly forgotten, such as a password that is remembered only until it is entered. Information in working memory can be stored elsewhere in the brain as long-term memory for periods ranging from days to weeks to years, and throughout a lifetime. Although long-term storage of explicit memory requires the hippocampus, the ultimate storage site for most declarative memory is thought to be the cerebral cortex. In this chapter, we focus on the cellular, molecular, and network mechanisms of the hippocampus that underlie the long-term storage of explicit memory.

Because the hippocampus receives its major input from a region of the cerebral cortex called the entorhinal cortex, an area that processes many forms of sensory input, we also consider how information from the entorhinal cortex is transformed by the hippocampus. In particular, we examine how neural activity in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus contributes to

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

spatial memory by encoding a representation of an

animal's location in its environment.

Explicit Memory in Mammals Involves

Synaptic Plasticity in the Hippocampus

## Unlike working memory, which is thought to be maintained by ongoing neural activity in the prefrontal cor-

tex (Chapter 52), the long-term storage of information

is thought to depend on long-lasting changes in the strength of connections among specific ensembles of neurons (neural assemblies) in the hippocampus that encode particular elements of memory. The idea that memory storage involves long-lasting structural changes in the brain, first referred to as an "engram" by the German biologist Richard Semon in

the early 20th century, dates back to the French philosopher Rene Descartes. In an attempt to locate an engram, the American psychologist Karl Lashley examined the effects of lesions in different regions of the neocortex on the ability of a rat to learn to navigate a maze. Since the performance in the maze seemed to be directly proportional to the size of the lesion, rather than its precise location, Lashley concluded that any memory trace must be distributed throughout the brain. Although it is now generally accepted that storage of an explicit memory is distributed throughout the neocortex, it is also clear that the process of storing memory requires the hippocampus, as demonstrated by the pioneering studies of Brenda Milner on patient H.M. (Chapter 52) and subsequent studies in animals with targeted lesions of the hippocampus. Thus, understanding how the brain stores explicit memory depends on an understanding of how the cortico-hippocampal circuit processes and stores information. The nature of the basic mechanisms for memory storage was and remains the subject of much speculation and debate among psychologists and neurosci-

entists. One influential theory was proposed by the Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb, who suggested in 1949 that memory-encoding neural assemblies may be generated when synaptic connections are strengthened based on experience. According to Hebb's rule: "When an axon of cell A . . . excites cell B and repeatedly or persistently takes part in firing it, some growth process or metabolic change takes place in one or both cells so that A's efficiency as one of the cells firing B is increased." The key element of Hebb's rule is the requirement for coincidence of pre- and postsynaptic firing, and so the rule has sometimes been rephrased as "Cells that fire together, wire together." A similar Hebbian coincidence principle is thought to be involved

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1340

in fine-tuning synaptic connections during the late stages

of development (Chapter 49). Hebb's ideas were later

refined by the theoretical neuroscientist David Marr,

based on a consideration of the hippocampal circuit. The hippocampus comprises a loop of connections that process multimodal sensory and spatial information from the superficial layers of the nearby entorhi-

nal cortex. This information passes through multiple synapses before arriving at the hippocampal CA1 region, the major output area of the hippocampus. The critical importance of CA1 neurons in learning and memory is seen in the profound memory loss exhibited by patients with lesions in this region alone, an observation supported by numerous animal studies. Information from the entorhinal cortex reaches CA1 neurons along two excitatory pathways, one direct and one indirect. In the indirect pathway, the axons of neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex project through the perforant pathway to excite the granule cells of the den-

tate gyrus (an area considered part of the hippocampus). Next, the axons of the granule cells project in the mossy fiber pathway to excite the pyramidal cells in the CA3 region of the hippocampus. Finally, axons of the CA3 neurons project through the Schaffer collateral pathway to make excitatory synapses on more proximal regions of the dendrites of the CA1 pyramidal cells (Figure 54–1). (Because of its three successive excitatory synaptic connections, the indirect pathway is often referred to as the trisynaptic pathway). Finally, CA1 pyramidal cells project back to the deep layers of entorhinal cortex and forward to the subiculum, another medial temporal lobe structure that connects the hippocampus with a wide diversity of brain regions. In parallel with the indirect pathway, the entorhinal cortex also projects directly to CA3 and CA1 hippocampal regions. In the direct pathway to CA1,

neurons in layer III of the entorhinal cortex send their axons through the perforant pathway to form excitatory synapses on the very distal regions of the apical dendrites of CA1 neurons (such projections are also called the temporoammonic pathway). Interactions between direct and indirect inputs at each stage of the hippocampal circuit are likely important for memory storage or recall, although the precise nature of these interactions remains to be determined. In addition to the above pathways that link different stages of the hippocampal circuit, CA3 pyramidal neurons also make strong excitatory connections with

one another. This self-excitation through recurrent collaterals is thought to contribute to associative aspects of memory storage and recall. Under pathological conditions, such self-excitation can lead to seizures.

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Fornix

project through the mossy fiber pathway and make excitatory

synapses with the pyramidal cells in area CA3 of the hippocam-

<!-- image -->

hippocampus from the entorhinal cortex through the perforant

pathways, which provide both direct and indirect input to pyramidal neurons in area CA1, the major output neurons of the hippocampus. (Arrows denote the direction of impulse flow.) The indirect trisynaptic pathway has three component connections. Neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex send their axons through the perforant path to make excitatory synapses Finally, neurons in the relatively small CA2 region,

located between CA3 and CA1, receive information

from entorhinal cortex layer II through both a direct

pathway and an indirect pathway via the dentate

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1341

pus. The CA3 cells excite the pyramidal cells in CA1 by means of the Schaffer collateral pathway. In the direct pathway, y, neurons in layer III of the entorhinal cortex project through the perforant path to make excitatory synapses on the distal dendrites of CA3 and CA1 pyramidal neurons without inter vening synapses (shown only for CA1). gyrus and CA3. The CA2 region also receives strong

input from hypothalamic nuclei that release oxy-

tocin and vasopressin, hormones important for social

behavior. In turn, CA2 sends a strong output to CA1,

20/01/21 2:52 PM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

providing CA1 with a third source of excitatory input

(in addition to the direct and trisynaptic routes from

the entorhinal cortex).

Long-Term Potentiation at Distinct Hippocampal Pathways Is Essential for Explicit Memory Storage

## How is information stored in the hippocampal circuit to provide a long-lasting memory trace? In 1973, Timothy Bliss and Terje Lømo discovered that a brief period

of high-frequency synaptic stimulation causes a persistent increase in the amplitude of hippocampal excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), a process termed long-term potentiation or LTP (Chapter 13). The enhancement in the EPSP, in turn, increases the probability that the postsynaptic cell will fire action potentials. Bliss and Lømo examined the initial stage of the indirect hippocampal pathway—the synapses formed by the perforant pathway from entorhinal cortex layer

II neurons with dentate gyrus granule neurons. Subsequent studies showed that brief high-frequency trains of stimulation can induce forms of LTP at nearly all excitatory synapses of this indirect pathway as well as at the direct perforant path synapses with CA3 and CA1 neurons (Figure 54–2). LTP can last for days or even weeks when induced in intact animals using implanted electrodes and can last several hours in isolated slices of hippocampus and in hippocampal neurons in cell culture. Studies in the different hippocampal pathways have shown that LTP at different synapses is not a single process. Rather, it comprises a family of pro-

cesses that strengthen synaptic transmission at different hippocampal synapses through distinct cellular and molecular mechanisms. Indeed, even at a single synapse, different forms of LTP can be induced by different patterns of synaptic activity, although these distinct processes share many important similarities. All forms of LTP are induced by synaptic activity in the pathway that is being potentiated—that is, LTP is homosynaptic. In addition, LTP is synapse specific; only

those synapses that are activated by the tetanic stimulation are potentiated. However, the various forms of LTP differ in their dependence on specific receptors and ion channels. In addition, different forms of LTP recruit different second-messenger signaling pathways that act at different synaptic sites. Some forms of LTP result from an enhancement of the postsynaptic response to the neurotransmitter glutamate, whereas other forms of LTP result from the enhancement of glutamate release from the presynaptic terminal, and still other forms of LTP engage both the presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons.

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1342

The similarities and differences in the mechanisms

of different forms of LTP can be seen by compar-

ing LTP at Schaffer collateral, mossy fiber, and direct

entorhinal synapses. In all three pathways, synaptic transmission is persistently enhanced in response to a brief tetanic stimulation. However, the contribution of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor to the induction of LTP differs in the three pathways. At the Schaffer collateral synapses, the induction of LTP in response to a brief 100-Hz stimulation is completely blocked when the tetanus is applied in the presence of the NMDA receptor antagonist 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (AP5 or APV). In contrast, APV only partially inhibits the induction of LTP at the direct entorhinal synapses with CA1 neurons and has no effect on LTP at the mossy fiber synapses with CA3 pyramidal neurons (Figure 54–2). Long-term potentiation in the mossy fiber pathway is largely presynaptic and is triggered by the large Ca 2+ influx into the presynaptic terminals during the

tetanus. The Ca 2+ influx activates a calcium/calmodulindependent adenylyl cyclase, thereby increasing the production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and activating protein kinase A (PKA; see Chapter 14). This leads to the phosphorylation of presynaptic vesicle proteins that enhance the release of glutamate from the mossy fiber terminals, resulting in an increase in the EPSP. Activity in the postsynaptic cell is not required for this form of LTP. Thus, unlike Hebbian plasticity, mossy fiber LTP is nonassociative. In the Schaffer collateral pathway, however, LTP is associative, largely as a result of the properties of the NMDA receptors (Figure 54–3; see also Chapter 13).

As is the case with most excitatory synapses in the brain, glutamate released from the Schaffer collateral terminals activates both α-amino-3-hydroxy-5methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and NMDA receptor-channels in the postsynaptic membrane of CA1 pyramidal neurons. However, unlike the AMPA receptors, activation of the NMDA receptors is associative because it requires simultaneous presynaptic and postsynaptic activity. This is because the pore of the NMDA receptor-channel is normally blocked by extracellular Mg 2+ at typical negative resting potentials, which prevents these channels from conducting ions in response to glutamate. For the NMDA receptor-channel to function efficiently, the postsynaptic membrane must be depolarized sufficiently to expel the bound Mg 2+ by electrostatic repulsion. In this manner, the NMDA receptor-channel acts as a coincidence detector: It is functional only when (1) the action potentials in the presynaptic neuron release glutamate that binds to the receptor and (2) the membrane of the postsynaptic

20/01/21 2:52 PM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

providing CA1 with a third source of excitatory input

(in addition to the direct and trisynaptic routes from

the entorhinal cortex).

Long-Term Potentiation at Distinct Hippocampal Pathways Is Essential for Explicit Memory Storage

## How is information stored in the hippocampal circuit to provide a long-lasting memory trace? In 1973, Timothy Bliss and Terje Lømo discovered that a brief period

of high-frequency synaptic stimulation causes a persistent increase in the amplitude of hippocampal excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), a process termed long-term potentiation or LTP (Chapter 13). The enhancement in the EPSP, in turn, increases the probability that the postsynaptic cell will fire action potentials. Bliss and Lømo examined the initial stage of the indirect hippocampal pathway—the synapses formed by the perforant pathway from entorhinal cortex layer

II neurons with dentate gyrus granule neurons. Subsequent studies showed that brief high-frequency trains of stimulation can induce forms of LTP at nearly all excitatory synapses of this indirect pathway as well as at the direct perforant path synapses with CA3 and CA1 neurons (Figure 54–2). LTP can last for days or even weeks when induced in intact animals using implanted electrodes and can last several hours in isolated slices of hippocampus and in hippocampal neurons in cell culture. Studies in the different hippocampal pathways have shown that LTP at different synapses is not a single process. Rather, it comprises a family of pro-

cesses that strengthen synaptic transmission at different hippocampal synapses through distinct cellular and molecular mechanisms. Indeed, even at a single synapse, different forms of LTP can be induced by different patterns of synaptic activity, although these distinct processes share many important similarities. All forms of LTP are induced by synaptic activity in the pathway that is being potentiated—that is, LTP is homosynaptic. In addition, LTP is synapse specific; only

those synapses that are activated by the tetanic stimulation are potentiated. However, the various forms of LTP differ in their dependence on specific receptors and ion channels. In addition, different forms of LTP recruit different second-messenger signaling pathways that act at different synaptic sites. Some forms of LTP result from an enhancement of the postsynaptic response to the neurotransmitter glutamate, whereas other forms of LTP result from the enhancement of glutamate release from the presynaptic terminal, and still other forms of LTP engage both the presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons.

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1342

The similarities and differences in the mechanisms

of different forms of LTP can be seen by compar-

ing LTP at Schaffer collateral, mossy fiber, and direct

entorhinal synapses. In all three pathways, synaptic transmission is persistently enhanced in response to a brief tetanic stimulation. However, the contribution of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor to the induction of LTP differs in the three pathways. At the Schaffer collateral synapses, the induction of LTP in response to a brief 100-Hz stimulation is completely blocked when the tetanus is applied in the presence of the NMDA receptor antagonist 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (AP5 or APV). In contrast, APV only partially inhibits the induction of LTP at the direct entorhinal synapses with CA1 neurons and has no effect on LTP at the mossy fiber synapses with CA3 pyramidal neurons (Figure 54–2). Long-term potentiation in the mossy fiber pathway is largely presynaptic and is triggered by the large Ca 2+ influx into the presynaptic terminals during the

tetanus. The Ca 2+ influx activates a calcium/calmodulindependent adenylyl cyclase, thereby increasing the production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and activating protein kinase A (PKA; see Chapter 14). This leads to the phosphorylation of presynaptic vesicle proteins that enhance the release of glutamate from the mossy fiber terminals, resulting in an increase in the EPSP. Activity in the postsynaptic cell is not required for this form of LTP. Thus, unlike Hebbian plasticity, mossy fiber LTP is nonassociative. In the Schaffer collateral pathway, however, LTP is associative, largely as a result of the properties of the NMDA receptors (Figure 54–3; see also Chapter 13).

As is the case with most excitatory synapses in the brain, glutamate released from the Schaffer collateral terminals activates both α-amino-3-hydroxy-5methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and NMDA receptor-channels in the postsynaptic membrane of CA1 pyramidal neurons. However, unlike the AMPA receptors, activation of the NMDA receptors is associative because it requires simultaneous presynaptic and postsynaptic activity. This is because the pore of the NMDA receptor-channel is normally blocked by extracellular Mg 2+ at typical negative resting potentials, which prevents these channels from conducting ions in response to glutamate. For the NMDA receptor-channel to function efficiently, the postsynaptic membrane must be depolarized sufficiently to expel the bound Mg 2+ by electrostatic repulsion. In this manner, the NMDA receptor-channel acts as a coincidence detector: It is functional only when (1) the action potentials in the presynaptic neuron release glutamate that binds to the receptor and (2) the membrane of the postsynaptic

20/01/21 2:52 PM

A Schaffer collateral pathway LTP



<!-- image -->

Schaffer collateral

pathway

Extracellular NMDA receptors CA1

NMDA receptors and 

channels

CA1

CA3

partly on activation of the NMDA receptor-channels and partly

Presynaptic

PKA


## 500

<!-- image -->

pathway. Long-term potentiation (LTP) occurs at synapses through-

out the hippocampus but depends to differing degrees on activation of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors. A. Tetanic stimulation of the Schaffer collateral fibers (at time 0 in the plot) induces LTP at the synapses between presynaptic CA3 pyramidal neurons and postsynaptic CA1 pyramidal neurons. The plot shows the size of the extracellular field excitatory postsynap-

tic potential (fEPSP) as a percentage of the baseline fEPSP prior to induction of LTP. At these synapses, LTP requires activation of the NMDA receptor-channels in the postsynaptic CA1 neurons as it is completely blocked when the tetanus is delivered in the presence of the NMDA receptor antagonist 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV). (Adapted from Morgan and Teyler 2001.)

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1343

2+

on activation of L-type voltage-gated Ca channels. It is there fore only partially blocked by APV. Addition of APV and nifedipine, a dihydropyridine that blocks L type channels, is needed to fully inhibit LTP. C. Tetanic stimulation of the mossy fiber pathway induces LTP at the synapses with the pyramidal cells in the CA3 region. In this experiment, the excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) was meas-

-

ured under voltage-clamp conditions. This LTP does not require activation of the NMDA receptors and so is not blocked by APV. However, it does require activation of protein kinase A (PKA) and so is blocked by the kinase inhibitor H-89. (Reproduced, with permission, from Zalutsky and Nicoll 1990. Copyright © 1990 AAAS.)

20/01/21 2:52 PM

2+

<!-- image -->

Voltage-clamp

recording

fEPSP (percent of baseline)

Key participants in different forms

of LTP


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition Nucleus

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1344

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

cell is sufficiently depolarized by strong synaptic activ-

ity to relieve the Mg

2+

block. Thus, the NMDA receptor

is able to associate presynaptic and postsynaptic activity

to recruit plasticity mechanisms that strengthen connections between pairs of cells, fulfilling Hebb's coincidence requirement for synaptic modification. What are the functional consequences of the activation of NMDA receptors by strong synaptic excitation? Whereas most AMPA receptor-channels conduct only

monovalent cations (Na + and K + ), the NMDA receptorchannels have a high permeability to Ca 2+ (Chapter 13). Thus, the opening of these channels leads to a significant increase in the Ca 2+ concentration in the postsynaptic cell. The increase in intracellular Ca 2+ activates several downstream signaling pathways—including calcium/ calmodulin–dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), protein kinase C (PKC), and tyrosine kinases—that lead to changes that enhance the magnitude of the EPSP at Schaffer collateral synapses (Figure 54–3). Different Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Contribute to the Forms of Expression of

Long-Term Potentiation

## Neuroscientists often find it useful to distinguish between the induction of LTP (the biochemical reactions activated by the tetanic stimulation) and the

expression of LTP (the long-term changes responsible for enhanced synaptic transmission). The mechanisms for the induction of LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse are largely postsynaptic. Is the expression of LTP at this synapse caused by an increase in transmitter release, an increased postsynaptic response to a fixed amount of transmitter, or some combination of the two? A number of lines of experiments suggest that the form of expression of LTP depends on the type of synapse and precise pattern of activity that induces LTP.

Figure 54–3 (Opposite) A model for the induction of long-

term potentiation (LTP) at Schaffer collateral synapses. A

single high-frequency tetanus induces early LTP. The large depo-

larization of the postsynaptic membrane (caused by strong activation of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid [AMPA] receptors) relieves the Mg 2+ blockade of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-channels (1), allowing Ca 2+ , Na + , and K + to flow through these channels. The resulting increase of Ca 2+ in the dendritic spine (2) triggers calciumdependent kinases (3)—calcium/calmodulin–dependent kinase (CaMKII) and protein kinase C (PKC)—leading to induction of LTP. Second-messenger cascades activated during induction of LTP have two main effects on synaptic transmission. Phosphorylation through activation of protein kinases, including PKC, enhances current through the AMPA receptor-channels, in part by causing insertion of new receptors into the spine synapses

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1345


In many cases, the expression of LTP in CA1 neurons

in response to Ca

2+

influx through NMDA receptor-

channels depends on an increase in the response of

the postsynaptic membrane to glutamate. But stronger patterns of stimulation can elicit forms of LTP at the same synapse whose expression depends on presynaptic events that enhance transmitter release. One of the key pieces of evidence for a postsynaptic contribution to the expression of LTP at Schaffer collateral synapses comes from an examination of so-

called "silent synapses." In some recordings from pairs of hippocampal pyramidal neurons, stimulation of an action potential in one neuron fails to elicit a response in the postsynaptic neuron when that neuron is at its resting potential (approximately −70 mV). This result is not surprising, as each hippocampal presynaptic neuron is connected to only a small number of other neurons. What is surprising is that in some neuronal pairs that appear unconnected when the postsynaptic membrane is initially at –70 mV, stimulation of the same presynaptic neuron is able to elicit a large excitatory postsynaptic current in the second neuron when the second neuron is depolarized under voltage clamp to +30 mV. In such neuronal pairs, the postsynaptic membrane appears to lack functional AMPA receptors so that the excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) is mediated solely by NMDA receptors-channels. As a result, there is no measurable EPSC when the membrane is held at the cell's resting potential (−70 mV) because of the strong Mg 2+ block of these receptorchannels (the synapse is effectively silent). However, a large EPSC can be generated at +30 mV because the depolarization relieves the block (Figure 54–4). The key finding from these experiments is seen following the induction of LTP using strong synaptic stimulation. Pairs of neurons initially connected solely

(4). In addition, the postsynaptic cell releases retrograde by silent synapses now often exhibit large EPSPs at the

messengers, such as nitric oxide (NO), that activate protein

kinases in the presynaptic terminal to enhance subsequent

transmitter release (5). Repeated bouts of tetanic stimulation induce late LTP. The prolonged increase in Ca 2+ influx recruits adenylyl cyclase (6), which generates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) that activates protein kinase A (PKA). This leads to the activation of MAP kinase, which translocates to the nucleus where it phosphorylates CREB-1. CREB-1 in turn activates transcription of targets (containing the CRE promoter) that are thought to lead to the growth of new synaptic connections (7). Repeated stimulation also activates translation of mRNA encoding PKMζ, a constitutively active isoform of PKC (8). This leads to a long-lasting increase in the number of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic membrane.

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition


Stimulate AP in cell a Record EPSC in cell b Before LTP After LTP

<!-- image -->

apses during long-term potentiation (LTP).

A. Intracellular recordings are obtained from a pair of hippocampal pyramidal neurons. An action potential (AP) is triggered in neuron a by a depolarizing current pulse, and the resultant

excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) produced in neuron b is recorded under voltage-clamp conditions. B. Before induction of LTP, there is no EPSC in cell b (top traces) in response to an action potential in cell a (bottom traces) when the membrane potential of neuron b is at its

resting value of −65 mV (1). However, when neuron b is depolarized by the voltage clamp to +30 mV, the negative resting potential, and these EPSPs are medi-

ated by AMPA receptors. The simplest interpretation of

this result is that LTP somehow recruits new functional

AMPA receptors to the silent synapse membrane, a process Roberto Malinow refers to as "AMPAfication."

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1346

AMPA receptor EPSC

20 pA

20 mV

is then induced by pairing action potentials in neuron a with

2+

postsynaptic depolarization in neuron b to relieve the Mg block of the NMDA receptors. After this pairing, fast EPSCs initiated by activation of AMPA receptors are seen in cell b (3). (Reproduced, with permission, from Montgomery, Pavlidis, and Madison 2001. Copyright © 2001 Cell Press.) C. Mechanism of the unsilencing of silent synapses. Prior to LTP, the dendritic spine contacted by a presynaptic CA3 neuron contains only NMDA receptors. Following induction of LTP,

intracellular vesicles containing AMPA receptors fuse with the plasma membrane at the synapse, adding AMPA receptors to the membrane. How does the induction of LTP increase the

response of AMPA receptors? The strong synaptic

stimulation used to induce LTP triggers glutamate

release at both silent and nonsilent synapses on the same postsynaptic neuron. This leads to the opening

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

of a large number of AMPA receptor-channels at the

nonsilent synapses, which in turn produces a large

postsynaptic depolarization. The depolarization then


of the enhancement of synaptic transmission. The

phase we have focused on up to now lasts for only 1 to

3 hours and is termed early LTP; this phase is typically

2+ A Late vs early LTP induced by a single train of 100-Hz tetanic stimulation for 1 second. More prolonged periods of activity (using three or four trains of 100-Hz tetanic stimulation, each lasting 1 second) induce a late phase of LTP that can last 24 hours or even longer. Unlike early LTP, late LTP requires the synthesis of new proteins (Figure 54–5).




<!-- image -->

Late LTP (4 trains)

180 210

Control

Protein synthesis

<!-- image -->

propagates throughout the neuron, thus relieving Mg block of the NMDA receptor-channels at both the nonsilent and silent synapses. At the silent synapses, the Ca 2+ influx through the NMDA receptor-channels activates a biochemical cascade that ultimately leads to the insertion of clusters of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. These newly inserted AMPA receptors are thought to come from a reserve pool stored in endosomal vesicles within dendritic spines, the site of all excitatory input to pyramidal neurons (Chapter 13). Calcium influx through the NMDA receptor-channels elevates spine Ca 2+ levels, triggering a postsynaptic signaling cascade that leads to phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tail of the vesicular AMPA receptors by PKC (Chapter 14), leading to their insertion in the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 54–3). Because the induction of almost all forms of postsynaptic LTP requires Ca 2+ influx into the postsynaptic cell, the finding that transmitter release is enhanced

during some forms of LTP implies that the presynaptic cell must receive a signal from the postsynaptic cell that LTP has been induced. There is now evidence that calcium-activated second messengers in the postsynaptic cell, or perhaps Ca 2+ itself, cause the postsynaptic cell to release one or more chemical messengers, including the gas nitric oxide, that diffuse to the presynaptic terminals to enhance transmitter release (Figure 54–3 and Chapter 14). Importantly, these diffusible retrograde signals appear to affect only those presynaptic terminals that have been activated by the tetanic stimulation, thereby preserving synapse specificity. Long-Term Potentiation Has Early and Late Phases

Long-term potentiation has two phases, early and

## late, that provide a means of regulating the duration

Figure 54–5 (Right) Long-term potentiation (LTP) in the CA1

region of the hippocampus has early and late phases.

A. Early LTP is induced by a single tetanus lasting 1 second at

100 Hz, whereas late LTP is induced by four tetani given 10 minutes apart. Early LTP of the field excitatory postsynaptic

potential (fEPSP) lasts only 1 to 2 hours, whereas the late LTP lasts more than 8 hours (only the first 3.5 hours are shown). B. Early LTP induced by one tetanus is not blocked by anisomycin (bar), an inhibitor of protein synthesis. C. Late LTP, normally induced by three trains of stimulation,

- is blocked by anisomycin. (Three or four trains can be used to induce late LTP.) (Panels B and C reproduced, with permission,
- from Huang and Kandel 1994.)

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1347


<!-- image -->


Control

Protein synthesis

inhibited

(anisomycin)

120 180

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Whereas the early phase of LTP is mediated by changes

at existing synapses, late LTP is thought to result from

the growth of new synaptic connections between pairs

of co-activated neurons. Although the mechanisms for early LTP in the Schaffer collateral and mossy fiber pathways are quite different, the mechanisms for late LTP in the two pathways

appear similar (Figure 54–3). In both pathways, late LTP recruits the cAMP and PKA signaling pathway to activate by phosphorylation the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) transcription factor, leading to the synthesis of new mRNAs and proteins. Like sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia, which also involves cAMP, PKA, and CREB (Chapter 53), late LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway is synapse specific. When two independent sets of synapses in the same postsynaptic CA1 neuron are stimulated using two electrodes spaced some distance apart, the application of four trains of tetanic stimulation to one set of synapses induces late LTP only at the activated synapses; synaptic transmission is not altered at the second set of synapses that were not tetanized. How can late LTP achieve synapse specificity given that transcription and most translation occurs in the cell body, such that newly synthesized proteins

should be available to all synapses of a cell? To explain synapse specificity, Uwe Frey and Richard Morris proposed the synaptic capture hypothesis, in which synapses that are activated during the tetanus are tagged in some way, perhaps by protein phosphorylation, that enables them to make use of ("capture") the newly synthesized proteins. Frey and Morris tested this idea using the two-pathway protocol described above. They delivered four tetani to induce late LTP at one set of synapses with one electrode and delivered a single tetanus to a second set of synapses with the other electrode. Although a single tetanus on its own induces only early LTP, it is able to induce late LTP when delivered within 2–3 hours of the four tetani from the first electrode. This phenomenon is similar to the synapsespecific capture of long-term facilitation at the sensorymotor neuron synapses in Aplysia (Chapter 53). According to Frey and Morris, the single train of tetanic stimulation, although not sufficient to induce new protein synthesis, is sufficient to tag the activated

synapses, allowing them to capture the newly synthesized proteins produced in response to the prior delivery of the four trains of tetanic stimulation. The increased synaptic plasticity that this tagging mechanism affords, and its limitation to the period when newly synthesized proteins are around, may explain the recent finding that hippocampal cell assemblies that store memories of events closely spaced in time

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1348

have a larger number of common neurons than do cell

assemblies for events widely separated in time.

How can a few brief trains of synaptic stimulation

produce such long-lasting increases in synaptic transmission? One mechanism proposed by John Lisman

depends on the unique properties of CaMKII. After a brief exposure to Ca 2+ , CaMKII can be converted to a calcium-independent state through its autophosphorylation at threonine-286 (Thr286). This ability to become persistently active in response to a transient Ca 2+ stimulus has led to the suggestion that CaMKII may act as a simple molecular switch that can extend the duration of LTP following its initial activation. Studies from Todd Sacktor have suggested that longer-lasting changes that maintain late LTP may depend on an atypical isoform of PKC termed PKMζ

(PKM zeta). Most isoforms of PKC contain both a regulatory domain and a catalytic domain (Chapter 14). Binding of diacylglycerol, phospholipids, and Ca 2+ to the regulatory domain relieves inhibitory domain binding to the catalytic domain, allowing PKC to phosphorylate its protein substrates. In contrast, PKMζ lacks a regulatory domain and so is constitutively active. Levels of PKMζ in the hippocampus are normally low. Tetanic stimulation that induces LTP leads to an increase in synthesis of PKMζ through enhanced trans-

lation of its mRNA. Because this mRNA is present in the CA1 neuron dendrites, its translation can rapidly alter synaptic strength. Blockade of PKMζ with a peptide inhibitor during the tetanic stimulation blocks late LTP but not early LTP. If the blocker is applied several hours after LTP induction, the late LTP that had been established will be reversed. This result indicates that the maintenance of late LTP requires the ongoing activity of PKMζ to maintain the increase in AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 54–3). A second atypical PKC isoform may substitute for PKMζ under certain conditions, which may explain the surprising finding that genetic deletion of PKMζ has little effect on late LTP. Constitutively active forms of protein kinases may not be the only mechanism for maintaining long-lasting synaptic changes in the hippocampus.

Repeated stimulation may lead to the formation of new synaptic connections, just as long-term facilitation leads to the formation of new synapses during learning in Aplysia. In addition, long-lasting synaptic changes likely involve epigenetic changes in chromatin structure. During late LTP, phosphorylated CREB activates gene expression by recruiting the CREB binding protein (CBP), which acts as a histone acetylase, transferring an acetyl group to specific lysine residues on histone proteins, and thereby producing

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

long-lasting changes in gene expression. Mutations

in CBP impair late LTP and learning and memory in

mice. In humans, de novo mutations in the CBP gene

underlie Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a developmental disorder associated with intellectual impairment. Other studies implicate a second epigenetic mechanism, DNA methylation, in long-lasting synaptic plasticity and learning and memory. Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity Provides a More Natural Mechanism for Altering Synaptic Strength

## Under most circumstances, hippocampal neurons do not produce the high-frequency trains of action potentials typically used to induce LTP experimentally.

However, a form of LTP termed spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) can be induced by a more natural pattern of activity in which a single presynaptic stimulus is paired with the firing of a single action potential in the postsynaptic cell at a relatively low frequency (eg, one pair per second over several seconds). However, the presynaptic cell must fire just before the postsynaptic cell. If instead the postsynaptic cell fires just before the EPSP, a long-lasting decrease in the size of the EPSP occurs. Such long-term depression of synaptic transmission represents a distinct form of synaptic plasticity from LTP and is described more fully below. If the postsynaptic action potential occurs more than

Normal synaptic transmission Cooperativity Associativity

<!-- image -->

associativity, and synapse specificity. With normal synaptic


a hundred milliseconds before or after the EPSP, the

synaptic strength will not change.

The pairing rules of STDP thus follow Hebb's postu-

late and result in large part from the cooperative properties of the NMDA receptor-channel. If the postsynaptic

spike occurs during the EPSP, it is able to relieve the Mg 2+ blockade of the channel at a time when the NMDA receptor has been activated by the binding of glutamate. This leads to a large influx of Ca 2+ through the receptor and the induction of STDP. However, if the postsynaptic action potential occurs prior to the presynaptic release of glutamate, any relief from the Mg 2+ block will occur when the gate of the receptor-channel is closed (because of the absence of glutamate). As a result, there will be only a small influx of Ca 2+ through the receptor that is insufficient to induce STDP. Long-Term Potentiation in the Hippocampus Has Properties That Make It Useful as A Mechanism for

Memory Storage

## NMDA receptor–dependent LTP at the Schaffer collateral pathway and other hippocampal pathways has three properties with direct relevance to learning and

memory (Figure 54–6). First, LTP in such pathways requires the near-simultaneous activation of a large number of afferent inputs, a feature called cooperativity (Figure 54–6). This requirement stems from the fact

Inactive input

Weak active input

Strong active input

<!-- image -->

transmission, a single action potential in one or a few axons (weak input) leads to a small excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) that is insufficient to expel Mg 2+ from the N-methyld-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-channels and thus cannot induce LTP. This ensures that irrelevant stimuli are not remembered. The near-simultaneous activation of several weak inputs

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1349

LTP

No LTP

LTP

during strong activation (cooperativity) produces a suprath-

LTP in all pathways. Stimulation of strong and weak inputs

together (associativity) causes LTP in both pathways. In this way, a weak input becomes significant when paired with a powerful one. An unstimulated synapse does not undergo LTP despite the strong stimulation of neighboring synapses. This ensures that memory is selectively stored at active synapses (synapse specificity).

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

that relief of Mg

2+

block of the NMDA receptor-channel

requires a large depolarization, which is achieved only

when the postsynaptic cell receives input from a large

number of presynaptic cells. Second, LTP at synapses with NMDA receptorchannels is associative. A weak presynaptic input normally does not produce enough postsynaptic depolarization

to induce LTP. However, if the weak input is paired with a strong input that produces a suprathreshold depolarization, the resulting large depolarization will propagate to the synapses with weak input, leading to relief of the Mg 2+ blockade of the NMDA receptors and induction of LTP at those synapses. Third, NMDA receptor-dependent LTP is synapse specific. If a particular synapse is not activated during a period of strong synaptic stimulation, the NMDA

receptors at that site will not be able to bind glutamate and thus will not be activated despite the strong postsynaptic depolarization. As a result, that synapse will not undergo LTP. Each of these three properties—cooperativity, associativity, and synapse specificity—underlies a key requirement of memory storage. Cooperativity ensures

that only events of a high degree of significance, those that activate sufficient inputs, will result in memory storage. Associativity, like associative Pavlovian conditioning, allows an event (or conditioned stimulus) that has little significance in and of itself to be endowed with a higher degree of meaning if that event occurs just before or simultaneously with another more significant event (an unconditioned stimulus). In a network with strong recurrent connections, such as CA3, associative LTP enables a pattern of activity in one group of cells to become linked to a distinct pattern of activity in a separate, but partially overlapping, group of synaptically coupled cells. Such linkages of cell assemblies are thought to enable related events to become associated with one another and to be important for storing and recalling large varieties of experiences, as occurs with explicit memory. Finally, synapse specificity ensures that inputs that convey information not related to a particular event will not be strengthened. Synapse specificity is critical when large amounts of information must be stored in one network, because much more information can be stored in a cell through functional alterations at individual synapses than through blanket changes in a property of the cell, such as its excitability. Spatial Memory Depends on Long-Term Potentiation

## Long-term potentiation is an experimentally induced change in synaptic strength produced by strong direct

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1350

stimulation of neural pathways. Does this or a related

form of synaptic plasticity occur physiologically dur-

ing explicit memory storage? If so, how important is it

for explicit memory storage in the hippocampus? To date, a large number of experimental approaches have shown that inhibiting LTP interferes with spatial memory. In one approach, a mouse is placed in a pool

filled with an opaque fluid (the Morris water maze); to escape from the liquid, the mouse must swim to find a platform submerged in the fluid and completely hidden from view. The animal is released at random locations around the pool and initially encounters the platform by chance. However, in subsequent trials, the mouse quickly learns to locate the platform and then remembers its position based on spatial information— distal markings on the walls of the room in which the pool is located. This task requires the hippocampus. In a nonspatial, or cued, version of this test, the platform is raised above the water surface or marked with a flag so that it is visible, permitting the mouse to navigate directly to it using brain pathways that do not require the hippocampus. When NMDA receptors are blocked by a pharmacological antagonist injected into the hippocampus immediately before an animal is trained to navigate

the Morris water maze, the animal cannot remember the location of the hidden platform using spatial information but can find it in the version of the task with the visible marker. These experiments thus suggest that some mechanism involving NMDA receptors in the hippocampus, perhaps LTP, is involved in spatial learning. However, if the NMDA receptor blocker is injected into the hippocampus after an animal has learned a spatial memory task, it does not inhibit subsequent memory recall for that task. This is consistent with findings that NMDA receptors are required for the induction, but not the maintenance, of LTP. More direct evidence correlating memory formation and LTP comes from experiments with mutant mice that have genetic lesions that interfere with LTP.

One interesting mutation is produced by the genetic deletion of the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor. Neurons lacking this subunit fail to form functional NMDA receptors. Mice with a general deletion of the subunit die soon after birth, indicating the importance of these receptors for neural function. However, it is possible to generate lines of conditional mutant mice in which the NR1 deletion is restricted to CA1 pyramidal neurons and occurs only 1 or 2 weeks after birth (see Chapter 2, Figure 2–8, for a description of how this mouse line is generated). These mice survive into adulthood and show a loss of LTP in the Schaffer col -lateral pathway. Although this disruption is highly

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

localized, the mutant mice have a serious deficit in

spatial memory (Figure 54–7).

In some cases, genetic changes can actually enhance


regulated overexpression of CaMKII-Asp286 make it

clear that the molecular pathways important for LTP at

Schaffer collateral synapses are also required for spatial

both hippocampal LTP and spatial learning and memory. One of the first examples of such an enhancement

comes from studies of a mutant mouse that overex presses the NR2B subunit of the NMDA receptor. This subunit is normally present at hippocampal synapses in the early stages of development but is downregulated in adults. Receptors that include this subunit allow more Ca 2+ influx than those without the subunit. In mutant mice that overexpress the NR2B subunit, LTP is enhanced, presumably because of an enhancement in Ca 2+ influx. Importantly, learning and memory for several different tasks are also enhanced (Figure 54–8). One concern with gene knockouts or transgene expression is that such mutations might lead to subtle developmental abnormalities. That is, changes in the

-memory. However, such results do not directly show that spatial learning and memory are actually associated with an enhancement in hippocampal synaptic transmission. Mark Bear and his colleagues addressed this question by monitoring the strength of synaptic transmission at the Schaffer collateral synapses in vivo in rats. Recordings were made of synaptic strength using an array of extracellular electrodes to stimulate the Schaffer collateral inputs and another array to record

size of LTP and spatial memory in the mutant animals could be the result of an early developmental alteration in the wiring of the hippocampal circuit rather than a change in the basic mechanisms of LTP. This possibility can be addressed by reversibly turning on and off a transgene that interferes with LTP. Reversible gene expression has been used to explore the role of CaMKII, whose autophosphorylation properties and function in LTP were discussed

earlier in this chapter (see also Chapter 2, Figure 2–9, for a description of the methodology). Mutation of the autophosphorylation Thr286 site to the negatively charged amino acid aspartate mimics the effect of autophosphorylation at Thr286 and converts the CaMKII to a calcium-independent form. Transgenic expression of this dominant mutation of CaMKII (CaMKII-Asp286) results in a systematic shift in the relation between the frequency of a tetanus and the resultant change in synaptic strength during long-term plasticity. In the transgenic mice, tetanic stimulation at an intermediate frequency of 10 Hz, which normally induces a small amount of LTP, induces long-term the extracellular field EPSPs at various locations. Rats were then trained to avoid one side of a box through administration of a foot shock; the field EPSPs were remeasured after training, showing a small but significant increase in the amplitude of synaptic transmission at a subset of the recording electrodes. Does the increase in synaptic transmission during learning result from LTP or some other mechanism? Because the amount of LTP at a given synapse is finite, if learning does indeed recruit an LTP-like process, then the ability to induce LTP by tetanic stimulation after learning should be reduced. Indeed, Bear and his colleagues found that the magnitude of LTP is diminished at those recording sites where the behavioral training produced the greatest enhancement in the field EPSP. This result is similar to findings in the amygdala, where fear learning reduces the magnitude of LTP induced by subsequent tetanic stimulation. If LTP-like changes take place during memory formation in the hippocampus, such changes would be expected only in a small subset of synapses, namely

depression of synaptic transmission in the Schaffer collateral pathway (Figure 54–9A). In contrast, the transgenic mice showed normal LTP to a 100-Hz tetanus. The defect in synaptic plasticity with 10-Hz stimulation is associated with an inability of the mutant mice to remember spatial tasks. However, the defects in the induction of LTP and in spatial memory can be fully extinguished when the mutant gene is switched off in the adult, showing that the memory defect is not due to a developmental abnormality (Figure 54–9). These several experiments using restricted knockout and overexpression of the NMDA receptor and

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1351

those that participate in the storage of the particular memory. Different memories probably correspond to different assemblies of cells with strengthened synaptic interconnections. If this is true, however, hippocampal memories should be vulnerable to disruption by manipulations that indiscriminately alter synaptic strength within the network as a whole. To test this idea, investigators induced LTP throughout the dentate gyrus after hippocampal-dependent spatial training in the water maze task. This protocol indeed impairs the animal's memory of the goal location in the water maze. Control animals that are given NMDA receptor antagonists after learning but prior to highfrequency stimulation exhibit normal spatial memory. These results indicate that the memory impairment was generated specifically as a consequence of the generation of indiscriminate LTP, which likely disrupts the specific pattern of strong and weak synapses that encode memory of the goal location.

20/01/21 2:52 PM
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

localized, the mutant mice have a serious deficit in

spatial memory (Figure 54–7).

In some cases, genetic changes can actually enhance


regulated overexpression of CaMKII-Asp286 make it

clear that the molecular pathways important for LTP at

Schaffer collateral synapses are also required for spatial

both hippocampal LTP and spatial learning and memory. One of the first examples of such an enhancement

comes from studies of a mutant mouse that overex presses the NR2B subunit of the NMDA receptor. This subunit is normally present at hippocampal synapses in the early stages of development but is downregulated in adults. Receptors that include this subunit allow more Ca 2+ influx than those without the subunit. In mutant mice that overexpress the NR2B subunit, LTP is enhanced, presumably because of an enhancement in Ca 2+ influx. Importantly, learning and memory for several different tasks are also enhanced (Figure 54–8). One concern with gene knockouts or transgene expression is that such mutations might lead to subtle developmental abnormalities. That is, changes in the

-memory. However, such results do not directly show that spatial learning and memory are actually associated with an enhancement in hippocampal synaptic transmission. Mark Bear and his colleagues addressed this question by monitoring the strength of synaptic transmission at the Schaffer collateral synapses in vivo in rats. Recordings were made of synaptic strength using an array of extracellular electrodes to stimulate the Schaffer collateral inputs and another array to record

size of LTP and spatial memory in the mutant animals could be the result of an early developmental alteration in the wiring of the hippocampal circuit rather than a change in the basic mechanisms of LTP. This possibility can be addressed by reversibly turning on and off a transgene that interferes with LTP. Reversible gene expression has been used to explore the role of CaMKII, whose autophosphorylation properties and function in LTP were discussed

earlier in this chapter (see also Chapter 2, Figure 2–9, for a description of the methodology). Mutation of the autophosphorylation Thr286 site to the negatively charged amino acid aspartate mimics the effect of autophosphorylation at Thr286 and converts the CaMKII to a calcium-independent form. Transgenic expression of this dominant mutation of CaMKII (CaMKII-Asp286) results in a systematic shift in the relation between the frequency of a tetanus and the resultant change in synaptic strength during long-term plasticity. In the transgenic mice, tetanic stimulation at an intermediate frequency of 10 Hz, which normally induces a small amount of LTP, induces long-term the extracellular field EPSPs at various locations. Rats were then trained to avoid one side of a box through administration of a foot shock; the field EPSPs were remeasured after training, showing a small but significant increase in the amplitude of synaptic transmission at a subset of the recording electrodes. Does the increase in synaptic transmission during learning result from LTP or some other mechanism? Because the amount of LTP at a given synapse is finite, if learning does indeed recruit an LTP-like process, then the ability to induce LTP by tetanic stimulation after learning should be reduced. Indeed, Bear and his colleagues found that the magnitude of LTP is diminished at those recording sites where the behavioral training produced the greatest enhancement in the field EPSP. This result is similar to findings in the amygdala, where fear learning reduces the magnitude of LTP induced by subsequent tetanic stimulation. If LTP-like changes take place during memory formation in the hippocampus, such changes would be expected only in a small subset of synapses, namely

depression of synaptic transmission in the Schaffer collateral pathway (Figure 54–9A). In contrast, the transgenic mice showed normal LTP to a 100-Hz tetanus. The defect in synaptic plasticity with 10-Hz stimulation is associated with an inability of the mutant mice to remember spatial tasks. However, the defects in the induction of LTP and in spatial memory can be fully extinguished when the mutant gene is switched off in the adult, showing that the memory defect is not due to a developmental abnormality (Figure 54–9). These several experiments using restricted knockout and overexpression of the NMDA receptor and

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1351

those that participate in the storage of the particular memory. Different memories probably correspond to different assemblies of cells with strengthened synaptic interconnections. If this is true, however, hippocampal memories should be vulnerable to disruption by manipulations that indiscriminately alter synaptic strength within the network as a whole. To test this idea, investigators induced LTP throughout the dentate gyrus after hippocampal-dependent spatial training in the water maze task. This protocol indeed impairs the animal's memory of the goal location in the water maze. Control animals that are given NMDA receptor antagonists after learning but prior to highfrequency stimulation exhibit normal spatial memory. These results indicate that the memory impairment was generated specifically as a consequence of the generation of indiscriminate LTP, which likely disrupts the specific pattern of strong and weak synapses that encode memory of the goal location.

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A Action of Cre recombinase is restricted to CA1 region

Wild type Mutant

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1352

No NMDA

receptors

Mutant

Wild type

8 10 12

Chance

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Finally, although most behavioral tests of LTP have

used spatial learning tasks to assess memory, studies

have also shown that NMDA receptors, and by infer-

ence LTP, are necessary for a variety of hippocampaldependent explicit memories. When NMDA receptors in the CA1 area are blocked, mice are not able to master a nonspatial object recognition task, learn complex odor discrimination, or undergo the social transmission of a food preference, in which an animal learns to accept a novel food by observing a conspecific (another animal of its species) consume that same food. Thus, NMDA receptor–dependent LTP is likely required for many, if not all, forms of explicit memory in the hippocampus (most of which include a spatial recognition element). Explicit Memory Storage Also Depends on Long-

Term Depression of Synaptic Transmission

## If synaptic connections could only be enhanced and never attenuated, synaptic transmission might rap-

idly saturate—the strength of the synaptic connections

might reach a point beyond which further enhancement is not possible. Moreover, uniform synaptic strengthening may lead to a loss of memory specificity, with one memory interfering with another. Yet individuals are able to learn, store, and recall new memories throughout a lifetime. This paradox led to the suggestion that neurons must have mechanisms to downregulate synaptic function to counteract LTP. Such an inhibitory mechanism, termed long-term depression (LTD), was first discovered in the cerebellum,

Figure 54–7 (Opposite) Long-term potentiation (LTP) and

spatial learning and memory are impaired in mice that

lack the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in the CA1

region of the hippocampus. (Reproduced, with permission, from Tsien, Huerta, and Tonegawa 1996.) A. A line of mice is bred in which the gene encoding the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor is selectively deleted in CA1 pyramidal neurons. In situ hybridization is used to detect mRNA

for the NR1 subunit in hippocampal slices from wild type and mutant mice that contain two floxed NR1 alleles and express Cre recombinase under the control of the CaMKIIα promoter. Note that NR1 mRNA expression (dark staining) is greatly reduced in the CA1 region of the hippocampus but not in CA3 and the dentate gyrus (DG). B. LTP at the CA1 Schaffer collateral synapses is abolished in these mice. Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were recorded in response to Schaffer collateral stimulation.

Tetanic stimulation at 100 Hz for 1 second (arrow) caused a

large potentiation in wild type mice but failed to induce LTP in the NMDA receptor knockout (mutant) mice.

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1353


where it is important for motor learning. Since then,

LTD has also been characterized at a number of syn-

apses within the hippocampus. Whereas LTP is typi-

cally induced by a brief high-frequency tetanus, LTD is induced by prolonged low-frequency synaptic stimulation (Figure 54–10A). As mentioned above, it can also be induced by a spike pairing protocol in which an EPSP is evoked after an action potential in the postsynaptic cell. This suggests a corollary to Hebb's learning rule: Active synapses that do not contribute to the firing of a cell are weakened. Like LTP, a number of molecular and synaptic mechanisms are engaged during the induction and expression of LTD. Surprisingly, many forms of LTD require activation of the same receptors involved in LTP, namely the NMDA receptors (Figure 54–10A). How can activa-

tion of a single type of receptor produce both potentiation and depression? A key difference lies in the experimental protocols used to induce LTP or LTD. Compared to the high-frequency stimulation used to induce LTP, the low-frequency tetanus used to induce LTD produces a relatively modest postsynaptic depolarization and thus is much less effective at relieving the Mg 2+ block of the NMDA receptors. As a result, any increase in Ca 2+ concentration in the postsynaptic cell is much smaller than the increase observed during induction of LTP and therefore insufficient to activate CaMKII, the enzyme implicated in LTP. Rather, LTD may result from activation of the calcium-dependent phosphatase calcineurin, an enzyme complex that has a higher affinity for Ca 2+ compared to that of CaMKII (Chapter 14).

C. Mice that lack the NMDA receptor in CA1 pyramidal neurons

have impaired spatial memory. A platform (dashed square) is

submerged in an opaque fluid in a circular tank (a Morris water

maze). To avoid remaining in the water, the mice have to find the platform using spatial (contextual) cues on the walls surrounding the tank and then climb onto the platform. The graph shows escape latency or the time required by mice to find the hidden platform in successive trials. The mutant mice display a longer escape latency in every block of trials (four trials per day) than do the wild type mice. Also, mutant mice do not reach the optimal performance attained by the control mice after 12 training days, even though they show some improvement with training. D. After the mice have been trained in the Morris maze, the platform is taken away. In this probe trial, the wild type mice spend a disproportionate amount of time in the quadrant that

formerly contained the platform (the target quadrant), indicating that they remember the location of the platform. Mutant mice spend an equal amount of time (25%) in all quadrants; that is, they perform at chance level, indicating deficient memory.

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Wild type

NMDA-type receptor synaptic current

A

## NR2B transgenic

<!-- image -->

40 pA

100 ms

Transgenic More Ca

2+

enters the cell

C Morris water maze learning

CA1

NR2B

Transgenic

<!-- image -->


## 50

<!-- image -->

Wild type

0 15 30 45

(NMDA) glutamate receptor. (Reproduced, with permission,



<!-- image -->

Wild type

Transgenic


Wild type

Transgenic


from Tang et al. 1999. Copyright © 1999 Springer Nature.) A. The amplitude of the current generated by the NMDA receptors in response to a brief pulse of glutamate is enhanced and its time course prolonged in hippocampal neurons obtained from mice that contain a transgene that expresses higher levels

<!-- image -->

of the receptor's NR2B subunit compared to wild type mice. B. Long-term potentiation produced by tetanic stimulation of the Schaffer collateral synapses is greater in the transgenic

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1354

Left

quadrant

mice than in wild type mice. (Abbreviation: fEPSP, field excita-

C. Spatial learning is enhanced in the transgenic mice (upper

plot). The rate of learning in a Morris water maze (the reduction in time to find the hidden platform, or escape latency) is faster

in transgenic mice than in wild type mice. Spatial memory is also enhanced in the transgenic mice (lower plot). In the probe trial, the transgenic mice spend more time in the target quadrant, which previously contained the hidden platform, than do wild-type mice.

fEPSP (percent of baseline)

Search quadrant (%)

20/01/21 2:52 PM

A

fEPSP (percent of baseline)

B

<!-- image -->

duced, with permission, from Mayford et al. 1996.)

A. An LTP deficit is seen in hippocampal slices from transgenic mice that overexpress CaMKII-Asp286 kinase, a constitutively active mutant form of CaMKII. Expression of this transgene is

driven by a second transgene, the tTA bacterial transcription factor, which is inhibited by the antibiotic doxycycline (Dox) (see Chapter 2, Figure 2–9, for a complete description). Four groups of mice were tested: transgenic mice that were fed doxycycline, which blocks expression of the kinase; transgenic mice without doxycycline, in which the kinase is expressed; and wild type mice with and without doxycycline. In wild type mice, a 10-Hz tetanus induces LTP; doxycycline has no effect (data are not shown). In the transgenic mice, the tetanus fails to induce LTP but causes a small synaptic depression. In the transgenic mice that were fed doxycycline, the deficit in LTP is reversed. (Abbreviation: fEPSP, field excitatory postsynaptic potential.)

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1355




–20

10 Hz

0 20

Time (min)

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Transgenic + Dox

Transgenic

(CaMKII-Asp286)



Wild

type


% of group that acquired task





Wild type


Wild type Transgenic Transgenic + Dox

Mouse fed

doxycycline

Transgenic Transgenic

(CaMKII-Asp286)

+ Dox

B. The effect of the kinase on spatial memory was tested in a

Barnes maze. The maze consists of a platform with

40 holes, one of which leads to an escape tunnel that allows

the mouse to exit the platform. The mouse is placed in the center of the platform. Mice do not like open, well-lit spaces and therefore try to escape from the platform by finding the hole that leads to the escape tunnel. The most efficient way of learning and remembering the location of the hole (and the only way of meeting the criteria set for the task by the experimenter) is for the mouse to use distinctive markings on the four walls as spatial cues, thus demonstrating hippocampal spatial memory. C. Transgenic mice that receive doxycycline perform as well as wild type mice in learning the Barnes maze task (approximately 65% of animals learn the task), whereas

transgenic mice without the doxycycline, which thus express CaMKII-Asp286, do not learn the task.

20/01/21 2:52 PM

A

NMDA receptors are required for long-term depression


NMDA

receptor

<!-- image -->

phosphatase activity.

A. Prolonged low-frequency stimulation (1 Hz for 15 minutes) of Schaffer collateral fibers produces a long-term decrease in the size of the field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) in the

hippocampal CA1 region, a decrease that outlasts the period of stimulation (control). Long-term depression (LTD) occurs when α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors are removed from the postsynaptic membrane by endocytosis; it is blocked when the NMDA receptors are blocked by the drug 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV). (Adapted from Dudek and Bear 1992.) B. LTD requires protein dephosphorylation. The plots compare LTD in the hippocampal CA1 region of wild type mice and transgenic mice that express a protein that inhibits phosphoprotein

phosphatase 2A. Transgene expression is under control of the

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1356

Long-term

depression

Wild type

Transgenic

plot). When expression of the phosphatase inhibitor is turned

off by administering doxycycline, a normal-sized LTD is induced (right plot). C. Inhibition of phosphatase 2A reduces behavioral flexibility. Transgenic mice expressing the phosphatase inhibitor learn the location of a submerged platform in the Morris maze at the same

rate as wild-type mice (days 1–10). Thus, LTD is not necessary for learning the initial platform location. At the end of day 10, the platform is moved to a new hidden location and the mice are retested (days 11–15). Now the transgenic mice travel significantly longer paths to find the platform on the first day of retesting (day 11), indicating an impaired learning (reduced flexibility). When transgene expression is turned off with doxycycline, the transgenic mice display normal learning on all phases of the test. (Panels B and C reproduced, with permission, from Nicholls et al. 2008.)

CA1

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Long-term depression may also depend on a sur-

prising metabotropic action of the ionotropic NMDA

receptor-channels. Glutamate binding, in addition

to opening the receptor pore, is thought to trigger a conformational change in a cytoplasmic domain of the receptor that directly activates a downstream signaling cascade that increases the activity of phosphoprotein phosphatase 1 (PP1). Activation of PP1 or calcineurin eventually leads to changes in protein phosphorylation that promote endocytosis of AMPA receptors, resulting in a decrease in the size of an EPSP. Distinctly different forms of LTD can be induced through the activation of G protein–coupled metabotropic glutamate receptors. Such forms of LTD depend

on activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathways (Chapter 14) rather than activation of phosphatases. These types of LTD lead to a reduction in synaptic transmission through a decrease in glutamate release from presynaptic terminals as well as through alterations in the trafficking of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic cells. Much less is known about the behavioral role of LTD compared to that of LTP, but some insight has come from studies with mice using a transgene

that expresses an inhibitor of protein phosphatase. LTD that depends on NMDA receptors is inhibited when the transgene is expressed but is normal when transgene expression is suppressed (Figure 54–10B). Transgene expression does not affect LTP or forms of LTD that involve metabotropic glutamate receptors. Mice that express the transgene show normal learning the first time they are tested in the Morris maze. However, when the same mice are retested after the hidden platform has been moved to a new location, they show a decreased ability to learn the new location and tend to persevere in searching for the platform near the previously learned location (Figure 54–10C). Thus, LTD may be necessary not only to prevent LTP saturation but also to enhance flexibility in memory storage and specificity in memory recall. Studies on fear conditioning suggest that LTD in the amygdala may be important for reversing learned fear. Memory Is Stored in Cell Assemblies

While the cumulative evidence for a relationship

## between long-term synaptic plasticity and memory

formation is strong, we know less about how specific

cellular processes such as LTP enable memory formation. This reflects limitations in our knowledge of how neural circuits operate and how memories might be embedded in them. Theoretical models for memory

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1357


storage in neural circuits can be traced to Hebb's con-

cept of a cell assembly—a network of neurons that is

activated whenever a function is executed; for exam

-

ple, each time a memory is recalled. Cells within an assembly are bound together by excitatory synaptic connections strengthened at the time the memory was formed. Today, more than half a century later, Hebb's thoughts still form the framework for how the hippocampus mediates the storage and recall of memory,

although experimental proof has been difficult to obtain. A proper test requires recording the activity of thousands of neurons simultaneously, in combination with the experimental excitation or inactivation of selected cell groups. Technological advances are now enabling such experiments. By and large, the results obtained so far confirm Hebb's cell assembly model and implicitly point to LTP as the mechanism for their formation. In a telling study with mice, Susumu Tonegawa and his colleagues tested whether reactivation of neurons that participated in the storage of a specific mem-

ory is sufficient to trigger recall of that memory. The researchers first applied an electric shock to an animal as it explored a novel environment. Reexposure of the animal to the same environment a day or more later elicited a freezing response, indicating that the animal associated the environment or context (the conditioned stimulus) with the shock (the unconditioned stimulus). Using a genetic strategy, Tonegawa caused a subset of dentate gyrus granule neurons that were active during the fear conditioning to express the lightactivated cation channel channelrhodopsin-2 (Figure 54–11). The conditioned animals were subsequently placed in a novel environment that did not resemble the conditioned environment and so did not elicit a fear response. However, light activation of the subset of granule cells that were active during fear conditioning was able to elicit a strong freezing response, even though the animals were in a nonthreatening environment. This supports the idea that memories are stored in cell assemblies and, more importantly, demonstrates that reactivation of these assemblies is sufficient to induce recall of an experience. In a complementary experimental approach, a light-activated inhibitory Cl – transporter was expressed in CA1 cells active at the time of fear conditioning.

Later, the labeled cells were inactivated and the animals were placed again in the environment in which they received the shock. Under these conditions, the normal freezing behavior (ie, recall of the memory of fear conditioning) was blocked, suggesting that activity in the labeled CA1 cell population was necessary for memory retrieval. Taken together, these findings

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

suggest that reactivation of the specific cell assembly

pattern that occurred during encoding is both neces-

sary and sufficient for memory retrieval.

Perhaps the most direct test of the ensemble model is the creation of a false memory. Tonegawa and colleagues expressed channelrhodopsin in cells that were

A An engram can be labeled with a light-sensitive switch active during exploration of a novel environment (context A), except that no shock was delivered this time. At a later time, the labeled cells were reactivated using light stimulation as the mice explored a second novel environment (context B), this time in combination with an electric shock. When the animals were returned to the neutral context A, they froze, although they had never been shocked in this environment. This result indicates that the reactivation of the original engram of context A when paired with an aversive


Ca

2+

CaMK

<!-- image -->

Fear memory encoding

Doxycycline No doxycycline

Environment 1 Environment 2

Habituation Conditioning Shock Doxycycline Light on

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1358

eezing (%)

experience in context B is able to create a false memory,

causing the animals to fear context A. Thus, it is pos-

sible to modify the behavioral significance of a neural

representation (a pattern of neural firing in response to a given stimulus) by pairing the assembly with a new experience unrelated to the original experience. Different Aspects of Explicit Memory

Are Processed in Different Subregions

of the Hippocampus

## Explicit memory stores knowledge of facts (semantic memory), places (spatial memory), other individuals

(social memory), and events (episodic memory). As dis-

cussed above, successful storage and recall of explicit

ChR2-EYFP

2 Fear memory reactivation

Environment 1

Light off



<!-- image -->

ChR2-EYFP allows identication

and reactivation of a memory

Light off Light on After fear conditioning Before fear

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

memory requires that patterns of activity be formed

within local cell assemblies to avoid mix-up between

memories. At the same time, an important psychologi-

cal feature of hippocampal-dependent memory is that a few cues are usually enough to trigger the recall of a complex memory. How does the hippocampus perform all of these diverse functions? Do its subregions have specialized roles, or is memory a unitary function of the hippocampus? In at least some instances, it has been possible to assign key functions to specific areas of the hippocampus. The Dentate Gyrus Is Important for Pattern Separation


of mossy-fiber inputs onto an extraordinarily large

number of cerebellar granule cells might allow for pat-

tern separation in this system.

This idea of "expansion recoding," in which distinct firing patterns are formed through the projection of a limited number of inputs onto a larger population

## How does the hippocampus store a different pattern of neural activity in response to every experience that

needs to be remembered, including patterns that dis-

tinguish between two closely related environments? Contemporary ideas about how neural circuits accomplish this task, often referred to as pattern separation dates to the theoretical work of David Marr in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In a landmark paper on the cerebellum, Marr suggested that the extensive divergence

, of synaptic target cells, was later applied by others to the hippocampus. They proposed that hippocampal pattern separation results from the divergence of entorhinal inputs onto a larger number of granule cells in the dentate gyrus. The findings of subsequent experimental studies are broadly in line with these theoretical suggestions: Neural activity patterns recorded in different environments differ more extensively in the dentate gyrus and CA3 than they do one synapse upstream in the entorhinal cortex. The dentate gyrus is also implicated in pattern separation by the fact that lesions or genetic manipulations targeted to this area impair the ability of rats and mice to discriminate between similar locations and contexts. The dentate gyrus is the site of one of the most unexpected findings in neuroscience, the discovery that the birth of new neurons, or neurogenesis, is not

limited to early stages of development. New neurons

Figure 54–11 (Opposite) Stimulating a neuronal assembly

associated with a stored memory of fear conditioning elic-

its fear behavior.  (Panels reproduced or redrawn, with permis-

sion, from Liu et al. 2012. Copyright © 2012 Springer Nature.) A. Experimental protocol . 1. Exposure of a mouse to a new environment increases activity in a group of hippocampal neurons (cell assembly) that codes for the environment. The activ2+

ity increases intracellular Ca , which activates a CaM kinase signaling cascade, resulting in phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB. Phosphorylated CREB increases expression of immediate early genes, including the c-Fos transcription factor. In the c-fos-tTA transgenic mouse line, c-Fos binds to the c-fos promoter of the transgene and thereby initiates expression of the transcription factor tTA. The antibiotic doxycycline is fed to mice, which binds to and inhibits tTA, until the day of the experiment. 2. The dentate gyrus of the same transgenic mice was previously injected with an adeno-associated virus that contains a DNA sequence encoding ChR2 fused to the fluorescent marker protein EYFP (ChR2-EYFP). The transcription of this sequence is under control of the TRE promoter, which requires tTA (without doxycycline) for expression. 3. Exposure of the mice to a novel environment (after removing doxycycline from the feed) leads to expression of tTA and subsequent expression of ChR2-EYFP in a subset of active dentate gyrus neurons. 4. The ChR2-EYFP remains expressed for several days in the neurons, as seen by the EYFP fluorescence signal in dentate gyrus granule cells in a hippocampal slice. (ChR2-EYPF in green, dentate gyrus cell body layer in blue.) B. Recall of a fear memory. An optical fiber is implanted above the dentate gyrus. 1. During fear memory encoding,

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1359

mice were first habituated in one environment while being

fed doxycycline (which prevents expression of ChR2-EYFP).

The mice were then taken off doxycycline and exposed to a

new environment for a few minutes. This turns on gene transcription in the assembly of neurons that are active in the new environment, leading to prolonged expression of ChR2EYFP in these cells. The mice were then given a series of footshocks while in the new environment to induce fear con -ditioning: The mice learn to associate the new environment with a fearful stimulus. The mice were then returned to their cage and put back on doxycycline. 2. During fear memory reactivation 5 days after conditioning, mice show a normal defensive freezing behavior when reintroduced to the environment where they received footshocks (not shown). However, when mice are exposed to the environment to which they were initially habituated (no associated foot shock), they normally recognize this as a neutral environment and do not exhibit defensive freezing. However, as the mice explore the neutral environment, delivery of blue light to activate ChR2expressing neurons in the dentate gyrus causes the mice to freeze. This indicates that activation of the ensemble of ChR2-expressing neurons initially activated in the conditioning environment is sufficient to recall the fear memory associated with that environment. The experimental data show the freezing response in the neutral environment is much greater when light pulses are turned on compared to when the light is off (red plot; light delivery indicated in cartoon on top). Delivery of light pulses to an animal that had not undergone fear conditioning does not elicit freezing (blue plot).

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

continue to be born from precursor stem cells through-

out adulthood and become incorporated into neural

circuits. Nevertheless, adult neurogenesis is limited to

granule neurons in two brain regions: inhibitory granule cells in the olfactory bulb and the excitatory granule neurons of the dentate gyrus. Recent experimental findings raise the possibility that newly born granule neurons in the adult are particularly important for pattern separation, even though they represent only a minor fraction of the total number of granule cells. Procedures that stimulate neurogenesis enhance the ability of a mouse to discriminate between closely related environments. Experimental silencing of all dentate gyrus granule neurons except those newly born in the adult does not seem to impair pattern separation, implying that it is the newborn neurons that are most essential to pattern separation. Although some uncertainties remain on the role of neurogenesis in pattern separation and memory encoding, methods that enhance neurogenesis are currently being explored as a means of treating different types of age-related memory loss. The CA3 Region Is Important for Pattern Completion

## A key feature of explicit memory is that a few cues are often sufficient to retrieve a complex stored mem-

ory. Marr suggested in a second landmark paper in

1971 that the recurrent excitatory connections of CA3 pyramidal cells might underlie this phenomenon. He proposed that when a memory is encoded, neuronal activity patterns are stored as changes in connections between active CA3 cells. During subsequent retrieval of the memory, the reactivation of a subset of this stored cell assembly would be sufficient to activate the entire original neural ensemble that encodes the memory because of the strong recurrent connections between the cells of the ensemble. This restoration is referred to as pattern completion . The importance of LTP for pattern completion in the CA3 network is seen in studies with mice in which the NMDA glutamate receptor is selectively deleted

from the CA3 neurons. These mice experience a selective loss of LTP at the recurrent synapses between CA3 neurons, with no change in LTP at the synapses between mossy fibers and CA3 neurons or at the Schaffer collateral synapses between CA3 and CA1 neurons. Despite this deficit, the mice show normal learning and memory for finding a submerged platform in a water maze using a complete set of spatial cues. However, when the mice are asked to find the platform with fewer spatial cues, their performance is impaired, indicating that LTP at the recurrent

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1360

synapses between CA3 neurons is important for pat-

tern completion.

The CA2 Region Encodes Social Memory

Studies comparing neuronal representations in the den-

## tate gyrus and CA3 and CA1 areas have indicated that

each region has a unique function in the storage and

retrieval of hippocampal memory. Recent evidence suggests that the CA2 region plays a crucial role in social memory, the ability of an individual to recognize and remember other members of its own species (conspecifics). Genetic silencing of CA2 disrupts the ability of a mouse to remember encounters with other mice, but does not impair other forms of hippocampal-dependent memory, including memory of objects and places. The CA2 region is also unique among hippocampal regions in having very high levels of receptors for the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin, important regu-

lators of social behaviors. Selective stimulation of the vasopressin inputs to CA2 neurons can greatly prolong the duration of a social memory. Social memory also depends on CA1 neurons in the ventral region of the hippocampus, an area linked to emotional behavior, which receives important input from CA2. A Spatial Map of the External World Is Formed

in the Hippocampus

## How do hippocampal neurons encode features of the external environment to form a memory of spatial

locale, enabling an animal to navigate to a remembered

goal? At the end of the 1940s, the cognitive psychologist Edward Tolman proposed that somewhere in the brain there must be representations of one's environment. He referred to these neural representations as cognitive maps. They were thought to form not only an internal map of space but also a mental database in which information is stored in relation to an animal's position in the environment, similar to the GPS coordinates of a photograph. Tolman did not have the opportunity to determine whether a cognitive map actually existed in the brain, but in 1971, John O'Keefe and John Dostrovsky dis-

covered that many cells in the CA1 and CA3 areas of the rat hippocampus fire selectively when an animal is located at a specific position in a specific environment. They called these cells "place cells" and the spatial location in the environment where the cells preferentially fired "place fields" (Figure 54–12A,B). When the animal enters a new environment, new place fields are formed within minutes and are stable for weeks to months.

20/01/21 2:52 PM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

continue to be born from precursor stem cells through-

out adulthood and become incorporated into neural

circuits. Nevertheless, adult neurogenesis is limited to

granule neurons in two brain regions: inhibitory granule cells in the olfactory bulb and the excitatory granule neurons of the dentate gyrus. Recent experimental findings raise the possibility that newly born granule neurons in the adult are particularly important for pattern separation, even though they represent only a minor fraction of the total number of granule cells. Procedures that stimulate neurogenesis enhance the ability of a mouse to discriminate between closely related environments. Experimental silencing of all dentate gyrus granule neurons except those newly born in the adult does not seem to impair pattern separation, implying that it is the newborn neurons that are most essential to pattern separation. Although some uncertainties remain on the role of neurogenesis in pattern separation and memory encoding, methods that enhance neurogenesis are currently being explored as a means of treating different types of age-related memory loss. The CA3 Region Is Important for Pattern Completion

## A key feature of explicit memory is that a few cues are often sufficient to retrieve a complex stored mem-

ory. Marr suggested in a second landmark paper in

1971 that the recurrent excitatory connections of CA3 pyramidal cells might underlie this phenomenon. He proposed that when a memory is encoded, neuronal activity patterns are stored as changes in connections between active CA3 cells. During subsequent retrieval of the memory, the reactivation of a subset of this stored cell assembly would be sufficient to activate the entire original neural ensemble that encodes the memory because of the strong recurrent connections between the cells of the ensemble. This restoration is referred to as pattern completion . The importance of LTP for pattern completion in the CA3 network is seen in studies with mice in which the NMDA glutamate receptor is selectively deleted

from the CA3 neurons. These mice experience a selective loss of LTP at the recurrent synapses between CA3 neurons, with no change in LTP at the synapses between mossy fibers and CA3 neurons or at the Schaffer collateral synapses between CA3 and CA1 neurons. Despite this deficit, the mice show normal learning and memory for finding a submerged platform in a water maze using a complete set of spatial cues. However, when the mice are asked to find the platform with fewer spatial cues, their performance is impaired, indicating that LTP at the recurrent

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1360

synapses between CA3 neurons is important for pat-

tern completion.

The CA2 Region Encodes Social Memory

Studies comparing neuronal representations in the den-

## tate gyrus and CA3 and CA1 areas have indicated that

each region has a unique function in the storage and

retrieval of hippocampal memory. Recent evidence suggests that the CA2 region plays a crucial role in social memory, the ability of an individual to recognize and remember other members of its own species (conspecifics). Genetic silencing of CA2 disrupts the ability of a mouse to remember encounters with other mice, but does not impair other forms of hippocampal-dependent memory, including memory of objects and places. The CA2 region is also unique among hippocampal regions in having very high levels of receptors for the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin, important regu-

lators of social behaviors. Selective stimulation of the vasopressin inputs to CA2 neurons can greatly prolong the duration of a social memory. Social memory also depends on CA1 neurons in the ventral region of the hippocampus, an area linked to emotional behavior, which receives important input from CA2. A Spatial Map of the External World Is Formed

in the Hippocampus

## How do hippocampal neurons encode features of the external environment to form a memory of spatial

locale, enabling an animal to navigate to a remembered

goal? At the end of the 1940s, the cognitive psychologist Edward Tolman proposed that somewhere in the brain there must be representations of one's environment. He referred to these neural representations as cognitive maps. They were thought to form not only an internal map of space but also a mental database in which information is stored in relation to an animal's position in the environment, similar to the GPS coordinates of a photograph. Tolman did not have the opportunity to determine whether a cognitive map actually existed in the brain, but in 1971, John O'Keefe and John Dostrovsky dis-

covered that many cells in the CA1 and CA3 areas of the rat hippocampus fire selectively when an animal is located at a specific position in a specific environment. They called these cells "place cells" and the spatial location in the environment where the cells preferentially fired "place fields" (Figure 54–12A,B). When the animal enters a new environment, new place fields are formed within minutes and are stable for weeks to months.

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Different place cells have different place fields,

and collectively, they provide a map of the environ-

ment, in the sense that the combination of currently

active cells is sufficient to read out precisely where the animal is in the environment. A place-cell map is not egocentric in its organization, like the neural maps for touch or vision on the surface of the cerebral cortex. Rather, it is allocentric (or geocentric); it is fixed with respect to a point in the outside world. Based on these properties, John O'Keefe and Lynn Nadel suggested in 1978 that place cells are part of the cognitive map that Tolman had in mind. The discovery of place cells provided the first evidence for an internal representation of the environment that allows an animal to navigate purposefully around the world. Entorhinal Cortex Neurons Provide a Distinct Representation of Space

## How is the hippocampal spatial map formed? What type of spatial information is carried by afferent connections from the entorhinal cortex to the hippocampal place


and humans. Recordings from flying bats have shown

that grid cells and place cells represent locations in

three-dimensional space, suggesting the generality of

the cortico-hippocampal spatial navigation system. Finally, it has been proposed that grid cells in primates may encode positions in multiple sensory coordinate systems, including eye fixation coordinates. Grid cells display a characteristic relation between their firing fields and anatomical organization (Figure 54–13). The x,y coordinates of a cell's grid fields—often

called the phase of the grid—differ among cells at the same location of the medial entorhinal cortex. The x,y coordinates of two neighboring cells are often as different as those of widely separated grid cells. In contrast, the size of the individual grid fields and the spacing between them generally increase topographically from the dorsal to the ventral part of the medial entorhinal cortex, expanding from a typical grid spacing of 30 to 40 cm at the dorsal pole to several meters in some cells at the ventral pole (Figure 54–13A). The expansion is not linear but step-like, suggesting that the grid-cell network is modular. Interestingly, a gradual expansion is seen also in the size of the place fields of hippocampal place cells along the dorsal to ventral axis of the hippocampus

, (Figure 54–13B). This is consistent with the known pattern of synaptic connectivity: Dorsal entorhinal cortex innervates dorsal hippocampus, whereas ventral entorhinal cortex innervates ventral hippocampus. The finding that place fields are larger in the ventral hippocampus is in accord with results suggesting that the dorsal hippocampus is more important for spatial memory, whereas the ventral hippocampus is more important for nonspatial memory, including social memory and emotional behavior. Grid cells are not the only medial entorhinal cells with projections to the hippocampus. Others include head direction cells, which respond primarily to the direc-

cells? In 2005, a surprising discovery was made about the spatial representation formed by certain neurons in the medial entorhinal cortex, whose axons provide a major part of the perforant pathway input to the hippocampus. These neurons represent space in a manner very different from the hippocampal place cells. Instead of firing when the animal is in a unique location, like the place cells, these entorhinal neurons, termed grid cells fire whenever the animal is at any of several regularly spaced positions forming a hexagonal grid-like array (Figure 54–12C). When the animal moves about in the environment, different grid cells become activated, such that the activity in the entire population of grid cells always represents the animal's current position. The grid allows the animal to locate itself within a Cartesian-like external coordinate system that is independent of context, landmarks, or specific mark-

ings. A grid cell's firing pattern is expressed in all environments that an animal visits, including during complete darkness. The independence of grid-cell firing from visual input implies that intrinsic networks, as well as self-motion cues, may serve as sources of information to ensure that grid cells are activated systematically throughout the environment. The gridded spatial information conveyed by the entorhinal inputs is then transformed within the hippocampus into unique spatial locations represented by the firing of ensembles of place cells, but how this transformation occurs remains to be determined. Since grid cells were discovered in the medial entorhinal cortex of rats in 2005, they have been identified in mice, bats, monkeys,

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1361

tion that the animal is facing (Figure 54–14A). Such cells were originally discovered in the presubiculum, another region of the parahippocampal cortex, but they exist also in the medial entorhinal cortex. Many entorhinal head direction cells also have grid-like firing properties. Like grid cells, such head direction cells are active when an animal traverses the vertices of a triangular grid in a twodimensional environment. However, within each grid field, these cells fire only if the animal is facing a certain direction. Head direction cells and conjunctive grid and head direction cells are thought to provide directional information to the entorhinal spatial map. Intermingled among grid cells and head direction cells is yet another type of spatially modulated cell, the border cell (Figure 54–14B). The firing rate of a border

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A Experimental setup B Hippocampal place-cell ring pattern

<!-- image -->

.

in part A

max

Left: The animal's path in the enclosure is shown in

gray; firing locations of individual spikes are shown for a single place cell as red dots . Right: The firing rate of the same cell is color-coded (blue = low rate, red = high rate). In larger environments, place cells usually have more than one firing field but the fields have no apparent spatial relationship. C. Spatial pattern of firing of an entorhinal grid cell in a rat during 30 minutes of foraging in a square enclosure 220 cm wide. The pattern shows typical periodic grid firing fields.

Left: The trajectory of the rat is shown in gray; individual spike locations are shown as red dots . Right: Color-coded firing rate map for the grid cell to the left. Color coding as for the place cell in part B. (Adapted, with permission, from Stensola et al. 2012.)

type is the speed cell. Speed cells fire proportionally to

the running speed of the animal, irrespective of the ani-

mal's location or direction (Figure 54–14C). Together

with head direction cells, speed cells can provide grid cells with information about the animal's instantane -ous velocity, allowing the ensemble of active grid cells to be updated dynamically in accordance with a moving animal's changing location.

20/01/21 2:52 PM

location in its surroundings.

A. Electrodes implanted in the hippocampus of a mouse are attached to a recording cable, which is connected to an amplifier attached to a computer-based spike-discrimination program. The

mouse is placed in an enclosure with an overhead TV camera that transmits to a device that detects the position of the mouse. The enclosure also contains a visual cue to orient the animal. Spikes in individual hippocampal pyramidal neurons ("place cells") are detected by a spike discrimination program. The firing rate of each cell is then plotted as a function of the animal's location in the cylinder. This information is visualized as a twodimensional activity map for the cell, from which the cell's firing fields can be determined (shown in part B). (Adapted, with permission, from Muller, Kubie, and Ranck 1987. Copyright © 1987 Society for Neuroscience.) cell increases whenever the animal approaches a local

border of the environment, such as an edge or a wall.

Border cells may help align the phase and orientation

of grid cell firing to the local geometry of the environment. A similar role may be played by recently discovered object-vector cells—cells in medial entorhinal cortex that encode the animal's distance and direction relative to salient landmarks. A final entorhinal cell

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1362

A Entorhinal cortex

Dorsal Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage


<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 54–13 Grid fields and place fields expand in size as a

function of neuronal location along the dorsoventral axis of

the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus.

A. Topographical organization of grid scale in the entorhinal cortex. Grid spacing (distance between grid fields) was determined for 49 grid cells (colored dots) recorded in the same rat

at successive dorsal to ventral levels in the medial entorhinal

cortex (green area in the sagittal brain section on the right). Dashed lines indicate mean grid-spacing values, indicating that grid-spacing falls in one of four discrete modules, with points colored according to module. Firing rate maps for four

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1363

of the cells are shown in the middle (similar to those of Figure

54–12C). Recording locations for these cells are indicated by

numbers 1 to 4 to the right. (Adapted, with permission, from

Stensola et al. 2012.) B. Place fields from three different locations along the dorsoventral axis of the hippocampus. Right: Recording positions (numbers) in the hippocampal formation are shown at right.

Left: Color-coded maps show the firing fields of each place cell at the recording locations. The field size expands in cells along the dorsoventral axis of the hippocampus. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kjelstrup et al. 2008.)

20/01/21 2:52 PM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A Head direction cell

90°

Rate (Hz)

Head

<!-- image -->

Figure 54–14 The medial entorhinal cortex contains several

functional cell types tuned to distinct representations of an

animal's navigation.

A. On the left is the trajectory of a rat exploring a 100-cm-wide square enclosure (red dots indicate firing locations). A colorcoded firing rate map is also shown (color scale as in previous

figures). Note that the cell's firing is scattered across the enclosure. The plot on the right shows the same cell's firing rate as a function of head direction, in polar coordinates. The cell fires selectively when the rat faces south, anywhere in the box. (Adapted, with permission, from Sargolini et al. 2006.) B. Firing rate maps for a representative border cell in enclosures with different geometric shapes (red = high rate; blue = low rate).

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1364

Powerful

ring

Top row: The firing field map follows the walls when the enclo-

sure is stretched from a square (left and middle maps) to a

rectangle (right map). Bottom row: The firing field of the same

border cell in another environment. Introduction of a discrete wall (white pixels, right map) inside the square enclosure causes a new border field to appear to the right of the wall. (Reproduced, with permission, from Solstad et al. 2008.) C. Speed cells. Traces show normalized firing rate (colored traces) and speed (gray) for seven representative entorhinal speed cells during 2 minutes of free foraging. Maximum values of firing rate

and speed are indicated (left and right, respectively). Note high correspondence between speed and firing rate in these cells. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kropff et al. 2015.)

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Taken together, these discoveries point to a net-

work of functionally dedicated cells in the medial

entorhinal cortex reminiscent of the feature detectors


The firing pattern of a hippocampal place cell is very

sensitive to changes in the environment. The place fields

of a given place cell in the hippocampus often switch

of the sensory cortices. The functional specificity of each cell type stems from the cell's representation of a specific feature of behavior. In this sense, the entorhinal cell types differ from cells in most other association cortices, which integrate information from many sources in ways that are not straightforward to decode. What are the key differences between space-coding cells in the hippocampus and the medial entorhinal cortex? A striking property of all entorhinal cell types

is the rigidity of their firing patterns. Ensembles of colocalized grid cells maintain the same intrinsic firing pattern regardless of context or environment. When a pair of grid cells has overlapping grid fields in one environment, their grid fields overlap also in other environments. If their grid fields are opposite, or "out of phase," they will be opposite in other environments as well. A similar rigidity is seen in head direction cells and border cells: Cells with similar orientation in one environ ment have similar orientations in other environments. Speed cells also maintain their unique tuning to running speed across environments. These findings suggest that the medial entorhinal cortex, or modules of this cortical circuit, may operate like a universal map of space that disregards the details of the environment. By doing so, the entorhinal map differs strongly from the place-cell map of the hippocampus.

-to encode a completely different spatial locale when an animal's environment undergoes a major change, a process referred to as "remapping." Sometimes even minor changes in sensory or motivational inputs are sufficient to elicit remapping. The lack of correlation of hippocampal place maps for different environments (Figure 54–15) is thought to facilitate storage of discrete memories and minimize the risk that one memory will be confused with another, a process termed interference. For an explicit memory system like the hippocampus, with millions of events to be stored, this may be a huge advantage. For accurate and fast representation of an animal's position in space, as occurs in the medial entorhinal cortex, it may instead be beneficial to use a more stereotyped code that is less sensitive to environmental context or nonspatial sensory stimuli. Place Cells Are Part of the Substrate for Spatial Memory

## In addition to representing the animal's current location, place cells are thought to also store the memory

of a location in position-related firing patterns that

are evoked in the absence of the sensory inputs that originally elicited the firing. For example, as an animal sleeps after running repeated laps along a linear maze,

<!-- image -->

gle hippocampal place cell in different square enclosures, each

located in a different room. The rat was tested in one familiar (F) and 11 novel (N) rooms (recordings only shown for four of the novel rooms). The top row shows firing rate maps, whereas the bottom row shows trajectories of the animal's movement with

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1365

When the rat was returned to the familiar room at the end of

the experiment, the cell's firing field had a similar location to the initial recording in the familiar room, indicating that a given cell's spatial firing pattern in the same environment is stable. (Adapted, with permission, from Alme et al. 2014.)

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

place cells spontaneously fire in the same order that

they did in the maze, a phenomenon called "replay."

Similarly, past trajectories and experiences may influ-

ence firing rates at particular locations in the environment. The ability of place cells to represent events and locations experienced in the past likely underlies the ability of the hippocampus to encode complex memories of events. Once the firing pattern of a population of hippocampal neurons is formed for a given environment, how is it maintained? Because the place cells are the

same hippocampal pyramidal neurons that undergo experimental LTP, a natural question is whether LTP is important. This question was addressed in experiments in mice in which LTP was disrupted. In mice lacking the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor, hippocampal pyramidal neurons still fire in place fields despite the fact that LTP is blocked. Thus,

this form of LTP is not required for the transformation of spatial sensory information into place fields. Wild type mouse However, the place fields of the mutant mice are larger and fuzzier in outline than those in normal animals. In a second experiment with mutant mice, late LTP and long-term spatial memory were selectively disrupted by expression of a transgene that encodes a protein inhibitor of PKA. In these mice, place fields also form, but the firing patterns of individual cells are stable only for an hour or so (Figure 54–16). Thus, late LTP is required for long-term stabilization of place fields but not their formation. To what degree do these maps of an animal's surroundings mediate explicit memory? In humans, explicit memory is defined as the conscious recall of facts about people, places, and objects. Although consciousness cannot be studied empirically in the mouse, selective attention, which is required for conscious recall, can be examined. When mice are presented with different behavioral tasks, the long-term stability of place fields correlates strongly with the degree of attention required to

<!-- image -->

pocampus.  Color-coded firing rate maps (see Figure 54–12)

show place fields recorded in four successive sessions from a single hippocampal pyramidal neuron in a wild type mouse and from a neuron in a mutant mouse that expresses the persistently active CaMKII (which inhibits the induction of LTP).

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1366

four sessions, the place field for the cell in the wild type animal

is stable; the cell fires whenever the animal is in the upper right region of the enclosure. By contrast, the place field for the cell in the mutant mouse is unstable across the four sessions. (Reproduced, with permission, from Rotenberg et al. 1996.)

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

perform the task. When a mouse does not attend to the

space it walks through, place fields form but are unsta-

ble after 3 to 6 hours. Animals with unstable place

fields are unable to learn a spatial task. However, when a mouse is forced to attend to the space, for example, when trained to run to a specific location, the place fields are stable for days. How does this attentional mechanism work? Studies in primates have shown the importance of the prefrontal cortex and the modulatory dopamin-

ergic system during attention. Indeed, the formation of stable place fields in mice requires the activation of the dopamine D 1 /D 5 type of receptor, which has been shown to enhance the formation of late LTP through production of cAMP and activation of PKA. These results suggest that long-term memory of a place field, rather than being a form of implicit memory that is stored and recalled without conscious effort, requires the animal to attend to its environment, as is the case for explicit memory in humans. Disorders of Autobiographical Memory

Result From Functional Perturbations

in the Hippocampus

## Our sense of identity is greatly dependent on our store of explicit autobiographical memories and our abil-

ity to recognize and navigate through familiar spatial

-


levels of Aβ can rescue synaptic function and memory

in rodents, so far these treatments have been less suc

-

cessful in treating patients with Alzheimer disease,

perhaps because treatment must be initiated at early stages prior to irreversible synaptic changes. Altered hippocampal function may also contribute to cognitive problems experienced by individuals with schizophrenia, including disturbances in working

memory (Chapter 60). Recent studies using a genetic mouse model of schizophrenia report reduced synchrony between the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex associated with working memory. Furthermore, the place fields of place cells in the hippocampus CA1 region may be overly rigid in this mouse, suggesting that the ability of the hippocampus to distinguish different contexts may be impaired. Finally, a deficit in social memory in these mice has been linked to a reduction of parvalbumin-positive inhibitory neurons in the CA2 region; a similar loss of inhibitory neurons has been observed in postmortem brain tissue from individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Thus, studies of the hippocampus and related temporal lobe structures offer the great promise of providing fundamental insight into how explicit memories

are stored and recalled and how functional alterations in these structures may contribute to neuropsychiatric disease. In turn, such insight may aid in the discovery of new treatments for these devastating disorders. Highlights

1.

Explicit memory has both a short-term compo-

nent, termed working memory, and a long-term

component. Both forms depend on the prefrontal

- -cortex and hippocampus. 2. Long-term memory is thought to depend on activity-dependent long-term synaptic plasticity at synapses within the cortico-hippocampal cir-

environments. Neurological and psychiatric disorders that disrupt these abilities often occur as a result of changes in neural circuitry and plasticity mechanisms within the hippocampus and related regions in the temporal lobe. There is now substantial evidence that the dev astating memory loss associated with Alzheimer disease is associated with an accumulation of extra

cellular plaques of the protein fragment β-amyloid (Aβ) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of tau, a microtubule associated protein (Chapter 64). However, even before plaques and tangles are apparent, elevated levels of soluble Aβ and tau are thought to disrupt a number of cellular processes, particularly by reducing the magnitude of both early and late LTP at certain synapses. Mouse models of Alzheimer disease also show alterations in hippocampal place cell stability and population-level synchrony, which may contribute to memory loss and spatial disorientation. Changes in grid-cell function have also been observed in electrophysiological recordings in mouse disease models and in humans through functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. Although a number of preclinical studies have shown that agents that decrease

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1367

- cuit. A brief high-frequency train of tetanic stimulation leads to long-term potentiation (LTP) of excitatory synaptic transmission at each stage of the cortico-hippocampal circuit. 3. LTP at many synapses depends on calcium influx into the postsynaptic cell mediated by the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) type of gluta-
- mate receptor. This receptor acts as a coincidence detector: It requires both glutamate release and strong postsynaptic depolarization to conduct calcium. 4. The expression of LTP depends on either the insertion of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) type of

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

glutamate receptors in the postsynaptic mem-

brane or an increase in presynaptic glutamate

release, depending on the type of synapse and

- intensity of tetanic stimulation. 5. LTP has both early and late phases. Early LTP depends on covalent modifications, whereas late LTP depends on new protein synthesis, gene tran-
- scription, and growth of new synaptic connections. 6. Pharmacological and genetic manipulations that disrupt LTP often lead to an impairment of longterm memory, indicating that LTP may provide
- an important cellular mechanism for memory storage. 7. Memories are stored by cell assemblies. LTP may be required for forming event-specific assemblies. Recall of memory may reflect reactivation
- of the same assemblies that were active during the original event. 8. The hippocampus encodes both spatial and nonspatial signals. Many hippocampal neurons act as place cells, firing action potentials
- when an animal visits a particular location in its environment. 9. The entorhinal cortex, the area of the cortex that provides most of the input to hippocampus, also encodes both nonspatial and spatial information.
- The medial portion of entorhinal cortex contains neurons, called grid cells, that fire when an animal crosses the vertices of a hexagonal grid-like lattice of spatial locales. Grid cells are organized into semi-independent semi-topographically organized modules with distinct grid frequencies. The entorhinal map also contains border cells, objectvector cells, head direction cells, and speed cells. 10. Within a grid-cell module, pairs of grid cells maintain firing relationships rigidly across environments and experiences, suggesting that grid
- cells form a universal map that is expressed similarly in all environments. In contrast, place cells in the hippocampus form maps that are plastic as they are completely uncorrelated between environments. 11. Neuropsychiatric disorders such as Alzheimer disease and schizophrenia have been associated with deficits in hippocampal and entorhinal syn-
- aptic function, place-cell properties, and learning and memory. Treatments aimed at restoring such function may yield new therapeutic approaches to disease. 12. Despite their clear differences, implicit (Chapter 53) and explicit memory storage rely on a common logic. Both activity-dependent
- presynaptic facilitation for storing implicit

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1368

memory and associative long-term potentiation

for storing explicit memory rely on the asso-

ciative properties of specific proteins: Adenylyl

-

cyclase activation in implicit memory requires neurotransmitter plus intracellular Ca 2+ , whereas NMDA receptor activation in explicit memory requires glutamate plus postsynaptic depolarization. Such similarities indicate the fundamen tal importance of associative learning rules for memory storage.

Edvard I. Moser

May-Britt Moser

Steven A. Siegelbaum

Selected Reading

Basu J, Siegelbaum SA. 2015. The corticohippocampal circuit,

synaptic plasticity, and memory. Cold Spring Harb Per-

## spect Biol 7:a021733.

- Bliss TV, Collingridge GL. 2013. Expression of NMDA receptor-dependent LTP in the hippocampus: bridging the divide. Mol Brain 6:5.
- Frey U, Morris RG. 1991. Synaptic tagging and long-term potentiation. Nature 385:533–536. Hafting T, Fyhn M, Molden S, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2005.
- Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436:801–806.
- Kessels HW, Malinow R. 2009. Synaptic AMPA receptor plasticity and behavior. Neuron 61:340–350. Martin SJ, Grimwood PD, Morris RG. 2000. Synaptic plastic-
- ity and memory: an evaluation of the hypothesis. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:649–711.
- Nicoll RA. 2017. A brief history of long-term potentiation. Neuron 93:281–290. Rowland DC, Roudi Y, Moser MB, Moser EI. 2016. Ten years
- of grid cells. Annu Rev Neurosci 39:19–40. Taube JS. 2007. The head direction signal: origins, and sensory-
- motor integration. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:181–207. Tonegawa S, Pignatelli M, Roy DS, Ryan TJ. 2015. Memory
- engram storage and retrieval. Curr Opin Neurobiol 35: 101–109.
- References Abel T, Nguyen PV, Barad M, Deuel TAS, Kandel ER, Bourtch-

ouladze R. 1997. Genetic demonstration of a role for PKA

in the late phase of LTP and in hippocampal based long-

- term memory. Cell 88:615–626. Alme CB, Miao C, Jezek K, Treves A, Moser EI, Moser M-B. 2014. Place cells in the hippocampus: eleven maps for eleven rooms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:18428–18435.

20/01/21 2:52 PM

Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Bliss TVP, Lømo T. 1973. Long-lasting potentiation of synap-

tic transmission in the dentate gyrus of the anesthetized

rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path. J Physiol

- (Lond) 232:331–356. Dudek SM, Bear MF. 1992. Homosynaptic long-term depression in area CA1 of hippocampus and effects of N-methyld -aspartate receptor blockade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 89:4363–4367. Fyhn M, Hafting T, Treves A, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2007. Hippocampal remapping and grid realignment in entorhinal cortex. Nature 446:190–194.
- Hebb DO. 1949. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. New York: Wiley. Hitti FL, Siegelbaum SA. 2014. The hippocampal CA2 region
- is essential for social memory. Nature 508:88–92. Høydal ØA, Skytøen ER, Andersson SO, Moser MB, Moser
- EI. 2019. Object-vector coding in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 568:400–404.
- Huang Y-Y, Kandel ER. 1994. Recruitment of long-lasting and protein kinase A-dependent long-term potentiation in the CA1 region of hippocampus requires repeated tetaniza-
- tion. Learn Mem 1:74–82. Kandel ER. 2001. The molecular biology of memory storage: a dialog between genes and synapses (Nobel Lecture). Biosci Rep 21:565–611.
- Kjelstrup KB, Solstad T, Brun VH, et al. 2008. Finite scale of spatial representation in the hippocampus. Science 321:140–143.
- Kropff E, Carmichael JE, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2015. Speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 523:419–424. Lisman J, Yasuda R, Raghavachari S. 2012. Mechanisms of
- CaMKII action in long-term potentiation. Nat Rev Neurosci 13:169–182.
- Liu X, Ramirez S, Pang PT, et al. 2012. Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall. Nature 484:381–385.
- Mayford M, Bach ME, Huang Y-Y, Wang L, Hawkins RD, Kandel ER. 1996. Control of memory formation through regulated expression of a CaMKII transgene. Science 274:1678–1683.
- McHugh TJ, Blum KI, Tsien JZ, Tonegawa S, Wilson MA. 1996. Impaired hippocampal representation of space in CA1-specific NMDAR1 knockout mice. Cell 87:1339–1349.
- McHugh TJ, Jones MW, Quinn JJ, et al. 2007. Dentate gyrus NMDA receptors mediate rapid pattern separation in the hippocampal network. Science 317:94–99.
- Montgomery JM, Pavlidis P, Madison DV. 2001. Pair recordings reveal all-silent synaptic connections and the postsynaptic expression of long-term potentiation. Neuron 29:691–701.
- Morgan SL, Teyler TJ. 2001. Electrical stimuli patterned after the theta-rhythm induce multiple forms of LTP. J Neurophysiol 86:1289–1296.
- Muller RU, Kubie JL, Ranck JB Jr. 1987. Spatial firing patterns of hippocampal complex-spike cells in a fixed environment. J Neurosci 7:1935–1950.

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1369


Nakashiba T, Young JZ, McHugh TJ, Buhl DL, Tonegawa

S. 2008. Transgenic inhibition of synaptic transmission

reveals role of CA3 output in hippocampal learning.

- Science 319:1260–1264. Nakazawa K, Quirk MC, Chitwood RA, et al. 2002. Requirement for hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors in associative memory recall. Science 297:211–218.
- Nicholls RE, Alarcon JM, Malleret G, et al. 2008. Transgenic mice lacking NMDAR-dependent LTD exhibit deficits in behavioral flexibility. Neuron 58:104–117.
- O'Keefe J, Dostrovsky J. 1971. The hippocampus as a spatial map: preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res 34:171–175.
- O'Keefe J, Nadel L. 1978. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map . Oxford: Clarendon Press. Ramirez S, Liu X, Lin PA, et al. 2013. Creating a false memory
- in the hippocampus. Science 341:387–391. Rotenberg A, Mayford M, Hawkins RD, Kandel ER, Muller
- RU. 1996. Mice expressing activated CaMKII lack low frequency LTP and do not form stable place cells in the CA1
- region of the hippocampus. Cell 87:1351–1361. Rumpel S, LeDoux J, Zador A, Malinow R. 2005. Postsynaptic receptor trafficking underlying a form of associative learning. Science 308:83–88.
- Sacktor TC. 2011. How does PKMζ maintain long-term memory? Nat Rev Neurosci 12:9–15. Sargolini F, Fyhn M, Hafting T, et al. 2006. Conjunctive repre-
- sentation of position, direction, and velocity in entorhinal cortex. Science 312:758–762.
- Silva AJ, Stevens CF, Tonegawa S, Wang Y. 1992. Deficient hippocampal long-term potentiation in α-calciumcalmodulin kinase II mutant mice. Science 257:201–206.
- Solstad T, Boccara CN, Kropff E, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2008. Representation of geometric borders in the entorhinal cortex. Science 322:1865–1868.
- Stensola H, Stensola T, Solstad T, Frøland K, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2012. The entorhinal grid map is discretized. Nature 492:72–78.
- Tang YP, Shimizu E, Dube GR, et al. 1999. Genetic enhancement of learning and memory in mice. Nature 401:63–69. Taube JS, Muller RU, Ranck JB Jr. 1990. Head-direction
- cells recorded from the postsubiculum in freely moving rats. I. Description and quantitative analysis. J Neurosci
- 10:420–435. Tsien JZ, Huerta PT, Tonegawa S. 1996. The essential role of hippocampal CA1 NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity in spatial memory. Cell 87:1327–1338.
- Whitlock JR, Heynen AJ, Shuler MG, Bear MF. 2006. Learning induces long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Science 313:1093–1097.
- Zalutsky RA, Nicoll RA. 1990. Comparison of two forms of long-term potentiation in single hippocampal neurons. Science 248:1619–1624.

20/01/21 2:52 PM
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage

Bliss TVP, Lømo T. 1973. Long-lasting potentiation of synap-

tic transmission in the dentate gyrus of the anesthetized

rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path. J Physiol

- (Lond) 232:331–356. Dudek SM, Bear MF. 1992. Homosynaptic long-term depression in area CA1 of hippocampus and effects of N-methyld -aspartate receptor blockade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 89:4363–4367. Fyhn M, Hafting T, Treves A, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2007. Hippocampal remapping and grid realignment in entorhinal cortex. Nature 446:190–194.
- Hebb DO. 1949. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. New York: Wiley. Hitti FL, Siegelbaum SA. 2014. The hippocampal CA2 region
- is essential for social memory. Nature 508:88–92. Høydal ØA, Skytøen ER, Andersson SO, Moser MB, Moser
- EI. 2019. Object-vector coding in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 568:400–404.
- Huang Y-Y, Kandel ER. 1994. Recruitment of long-lasting and protein kinase A-dependent long-term potentiation in the CA1 region of hippocampus requires repeated tetaniza-
- tion. Learn Mem 1:74–82. Kandel ER. 2001. The molecular biology of memory storage: a dialog between genes and synapses (Nobel Lecture). Biosci Rep 21:565–611.
- Kjelstrup KB, Solstad T, Brun VH, et al. 2008. Finite scale of spatial representation in the hippocampus. Science 321:140–143.
- Kropff E, Carmichael JE, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2015. Speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 523:419–424. Lisman J, Yasuda R, Raghavachari S. 2012. Mechanisms of
- CaMKII action in long-term potentiation. Nat Rev Neurosci 13:169–182.
- Liu X, Ramirez S, Pang PT, et al. 2012. Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall. Nature 484:381–385.
- Mayford M, Bach ME, Huang Y-Y, Wang L, Hawkins RD, Kandel ER. 1996. Control of memory formation through regulated expression of a CaMKII transgene. Science 274:1678–1683.
- McHugh TJ, Blum KI, Tsien JZ, Tonegawa S, Wilson MA. 1996. Impaired hippocampal representation of space in CA1-specific NMDAR1 knockout mice. Cell 87:1339–1349.
- McHugh TJ, Jones MW, Quinn JJ, et al. 2007. Dentate gyrus NMDA receptors mediate rapid pattern separation in the hippocampal network. Science 317:94–99.
- Montgomery JM, Pavlidis P, Madison DV. 2001. Pair recordings reveal all-silent synaptic connections and the postsynaptic expression of long-term potentiation. Neuron 29:691–701.
- Morgan SL, Teyler TJ. 2001. Electrical stimuli patterned after the theta-rhythm induce multiple forms of LTP. J Neurophysiol 86:1289–1296.
- Muller RU, Kubie JL, Ranck JB Jr. 1987. Spatial firing patterns of hippocampal complex-spike cells in a fixed environment. J Neurosci 7:1935–1950.

Kandel-Ch54\_1339-1369.indd 1369


Nakashiba T, Young JZ, McHugh TJ, Buhl DL, Tonegawa

S. 2008. Transgenic inhibition of synaptic transmission

reveals role of CA3 output in hippocampal learning.

- Science 319:1260–1264. Nakazawa K, Quirk MC, Chitwood RA, et al. 2002. Requirement for hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors in associative memory recall. Science 297:211–218.
- Nicholls RE, Alarcon JM, Malleret G, et al. 2008. Transgenic mice lacking NMDAR-dependent LTD exhibit deficits in behavioral flexibility. Neuron 58:104–117.
- O'Keefe J, Dostrovsky J. 1971. The hippocampus as a spatial map: preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res 34:171–175.
- O'Keefe J, Nadel L. 1978. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map . Oxford: Clarendon Press. Ramirez S, Liu X, Lin PA, et al. 2013. Creating a false memory
- in the hippocampus. Science 341:387–391. Rotenberg A, Mayford M, Hawkins RD, Kandel ER, Muller
- RU. 1996. Mice expressing activated CaMKII lack low frequency LTP and do not form stable place cells in the CA1
- region of the hippocampus. Cell 87:1351–1361. Rumpel S, LeDoux J, Zador A, Malinow R. 2005. Postsynaptic receptor trafficking underlying a form of associative learning. Science 308:83–88.
- Sacktor TC. 2011. How does PKMζ maintain long-term memory? Nat Rev Neurosci 12:9–15. Sargolini F, Fyhn M, Hafting T, et al. 2006. Conjunctive repre-
- sentation of position, direction, and velocity in entorhinal cortex. Science 312:758–762.
- Silva AJ, Stevens CF, Tonegawa S, Wang Y. 1992. Deficient hippocampal long-term potentiation in α-calciumcalmodulin kinase II mutant mice. Science 257:201–206.
- Solstad T, Boccara CN, Kropff E, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2008. Representation of geometric borders in the entorhinal cortex. Science 322:1865–1868.
- Stensola H, Stensola T, Solstad T, Frøland K, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2012. The entorhinal grid map is discretized. Nature 492:72–78.
- Tang YP, Shimizu E, Dube GR, et al. 1999. Genetic enhancement of learning and memory in mice. Nature 401:63–69. Taube JS, Muller RU, Ranck JB Jr. 1990. Head-direction
- cells recorded from the postsubiculum in freely moving rats. I. Description and quantitative analysis. J Neurosci
- 10:420–435. Tsien JZ, Huerta PT, Tonegawa S. 1996. The essential role of hippocampal CA1 NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity in spatial memory. Cell 87:1327–1338.
- Whitlock JR, Heynen AJ, Shuler MG, Bear MF. 2006. Learning induces long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Science 313:1093–1097.
- Zalutsky RA, Nicoll RA. 1990. Comparison of two forms of long-term potentiation in single hippocampal neurons. Science 248:1619–1624.

20/01/21 2:52 PM


Language

Language Has Many Structural Levels: Phonemes,

Morphemes, Words, and Sentences

Language Acquisition in Children Follows a Universal Pattern

## The "Universalist" Infant Becomes Linguistically Specialized by Age 1

## The Visual System Is Engaged in Language Production

and Perception Prosodic Cues Are Learned as Early as In Utero

Transitional Probabilities Help Distinguish Words in Continuous Speech

There Is a Critical Period for Language Learning

The "Parentese" Speaking Style Enhances Language Learning

Successful Bilingual Learning Depends on the Age at

Which the Second Language Is Learned A New Model for the Neural Basis of Language Has Emerged

Numerous Specialized Cortical Regions Contribute to Language Processing

## The Neural Architecture for Language Develops Rapidly

During Infancy The Left Hemisphere Is Dominant for Language

Prosody Engages Both Right and Left Hemispheres Depending on the Information Conveyed

Studies of the Aphasias Have Provided Insights into

Language Processing Broca's Aphasia Results From a Large Lesion in

## the Left Frontal Lobe Wernicke's Aphasia Results From Damage to Left

Posterior Temporal Lobe Structures Conduction Aphasia Results From Damage to

a Sector of Posterior Language Areas Global Aphasia Results From Widespread Damage to

Several Language Centers

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1370

Transcortical Aphasias Result From Damage to Areas

Near Broca's and Wernicke's Areas

Less Common Aphasias Implicate Additional Brain

Areas Important for Language Highlights


anguage is uniquely human and arguably

our greatest skill and our highest achievement.

Despite its complexity, all typically developing

children master it by the age of 3. What causes this universal developmental phenomenon, and why are children so much better at acquiring a new language than adults? What brain systems are involved in mature language processing, and are these systems present at birth? How does brain damage produce the various disorders of language known as the aphasias? For centuries, these questions about language and the brain have prompted vigorous debate among theorists. In the last decade, however, an explosion of infor-

mation regarding language has taken us beyond the nature–nurture debates and beyond the standard view that a few specialized brain areas are responsible for language. Two factors have brought about this change. First, functional brain imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalogra-

phy (EEG), and magnetoencephalography (MEG) have allowed us to examine activation patterns in the brain while a person carries out language tasks—naming objects or actions, listening to sounds or words, and detecting grammatical anomalies. The results of these studies reveal a far more complex picture than the one first proposed by Carl Wernicke in 1874. Moreover, structural

18/01/21 6:40 PM

brain imaging techniques, such as diffusion tensor

imaging (DTI), tractography, and quantitative magnetic

resonance imaging (qMRI), have revealed a network of

connections that link specialized language areas in the brain. These discoveries are taking us beyond previous, simpler views of the neural underpinnings of language processing and production that assumed involvement of only a few specific brain areas and connections. Second, behavioral and brain studies of language acquisition show that infants begin to learn language earlier than previously thought, and in ways that had Chapter 55 / Language


infinite possibilities. Phonemes are the building blocks

of units of significance called morphemes. Each lan-

guage has a distinctive set of phonemes and rules for

combining them into morphemes and words. Words can be combined according to the rules of syntax into an infinite number of sentences. Understanding language presents an interesting set of puzzles, ones that challenge supercomputers. The advent of virtual personal assistants such as Siri

not been previously envisioned. Well before children produce their first words, they learn the sound patterns underlying the phonetic units, words, and phrase structure of the language they hear. Listening to language alters the infant brain early in development, and early language learning affects the brain for life. Taken together, these advances are shaping a new view of the functional anatomy of language in the brain as a complex and dynamic network in the adult brain,

one in which multiple, spatially distributed brain systems cooperate functionally via long-distance neural fascicles (axon fiber bundles). This mature network arises from the considerable brain structure and func tion in place at birth and develops in conjunction with powerful innate learning mechanisms responsive to linguistic experience. This new view of language encompasses not only its development and mature state, but also its dissolution when brain damage leads to aphasia. Humans are not the only species to communicate. Passerine birds attract mates with songs, bees code the distance and direction to nectar by dancing, and

-and Alexa, based on machine-learning algorithms, has allowed electronic devices to respond to select kinds of human utterances. However, we are still not conversing with computers. Fundamental advances will need to be made before humans can expect to have a conversation with a machine that resembles a conversation you can have with any 3-year-old. Machine-learning solutions do not accomplish their limited responses by mimicking human brain systems used for language, nor do they learn in the ways that human infants learn. Comparing machine-learning approaches (artificial intelligence) and human approaches is of theoretical and practical interest (Chapter 39) and is a hot topic for future research. Language presents such a complex puzzle because it involves many functionally interconnected levels, starting at the most basic level with the sounds that

monkeys signal a desire for sexual contact or fear at the approach of an enemy with coos and grunts. With language, we accomplish all of the above and more. We use language to provide information and express our emotions, to comment on the past and future, and to create fiction and poetry. Using sounds that have only an arbitrary association with the meanings they convey, we talk about anything and everything. No animal has a communication system that parallels human language either in form or in function. Language is the defining characteristic of humans, and living without it creates a totally different world, as patients with aphasia following a stroke experience so heartbreakingly. Language Has Many Structural Levels:

distinguish words. For example, in English, the sounds /r/ and /1/ differentiate the words rock and lock. In Japanese, however, this sound change does not distinguish words because the /r/ and /l/ sounds are used interchangeably. Similarly, Spanish speakers distinguish between the words pano and bano, whereas English speakers treat the /p/ and /b/ sounds at the beginning of these words as the same sounds. Given that many languages use identical sounds but group them differently, children must discover how sounds are grouped to make meaningful distinctions in their language. Phonetic units are subphonemic. As we have illustrated above with /r/ and /l/, these two sounds are both phonetic units, but their phonemic status differs

Phonemes, Morphemes, Words, and Sentences

## What distinguishes language from other forms of communication? The key feature is a finite set of distinctive

speech sounds or phonemes that can be combined with

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1371

in English and Japanese. In English, the two are phonemically distinct, meaning that they change the meaning of a word. In Japanese, /r/ and /l/ belong to the same phonemic category and are not distinct. Phonetic units are distinguished by subtle acoustic variations caused by the shape of the vocal tract called formant frequencies (Figure 55–1). The patterns and timing of formant frequencies distinguish words that differ in only one phonetic unit, such as the words pat and bat . In normal speech, formant changes occur very rapidly, on the order of milliseconds. The auditory system has to track these rapid changes in order for an individual

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Figure 55–1 Formant frequencies. For-

mants are systematic variations in the

concentration of energy at various sound

frequencies and represent resonances of the vocal tract. They are shown here as a function of time in a spectrographic analysis of speech. The formant patterns for two simple vowels (/a/ and /ae/) spoken in isolation are distinguished by differences in formant 2 (F2). Formant patterns for the sentence "Did you hit it to Tom?" spoken slowly and clearly illustrate the rapid changes that underlie normal speech. (Data from Patricia Kuhl.)

to distinguish semantically different sounds and thus

Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition



<!-- image -->

understand speech. Whereas in written language,

spaces are customarily inserted between words, in

speech, there are no acoustic breaks between words. Thus, speech requires a process that can detect words on the basis of something other than sounds bracketed by silence. Computers have a great deal of trouble recognizing words in the normal flow of speech. Phonotactic rules specify how phonemes can be combined to form words. Both English and Polish use the phonemes /z/ and /b/, for example, but the com-

bination /zb/ is not allowed in English, whereas in Polish, it is common (as in the name Zbigniew). Morphemes are the smallest structural units of a language, best illustrated by prefixes and suffixes. In English, for example, the prefix un (meaning not) can

be added to many adjectives to convey the opposite meaning (eg, unimportant). Suffixes often signal the tense or number of a word. For example, in English, we add s or es to indicate more than one of something (pot becomes pots , bug becomes bugs, or box becomes boxes). To indicate the tense of a regular verb, we add an ending to the word (eg, play can become plays , played). Irregular verbs do not follow the rule (eg, go becomes went rather than goed and break becomes broke rather than breaked). Every language has a different set of rules for altering the tense and number of a word.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1372


Finally, to create language, words have to be

strung together. Syntax specifies word and phrase

order for a given language. In English, for example,

sentences typically conform to a subject-verb-object order (eg, He eats cake), whereas in Japanese, it is typically subject-object-verb (eg, Karewa keeki o tabenzasu , literally He cake eats). Languages have systematic differences in the order of larger elements (noun phrases and verb phrases) of a sentence, and in the order of words within phrases, as illustrated by the difference between English and French noun phrases. In English, adjectives precede the noun (eg, a very intelligent man), whereas in French, most follow the noun (eg, un homme tres intelligent). Language Acquisition in Children

Follows a Universal Pattern

## Regardless of culture, all children initially exhibit universal patterns of speech perception and production

that do not depend on the specific language children

playing, and hear (Figure 55–2). By the end of the first year, infants have learned through exposure to a specific language which phonetic units convey meaning in that language and to recognize likely words, even though they do not yet understand those words. By 12 months of age,

18/01/21 6:40 PM

/a/ in "hot"

/ae/ in "hat"

infants understand approximately 50 words and have

begun to produce speech that resembles the native lan-

guage. By the age of 3 years, children know approxi-

mately 1,000 words (by adulthood 70,000), create long adult-like sentences, and can carry on a conversation. Between 36 and 48 months, children respond to the differences between grammatical and ungrammatical sentences in an adult-like way, although tests using the most complex sentences indicate that the intricacies of grammar are not mastered until late childhood, between 7 and 10 years of age. In the last half of the 20th century, debate on the nature and acquisition of language was ignited by a highly publicized exchange between a strong learning Chapter 55 / Language


called categorical perception. Eimas demonstrated that

infants could detect these slight acoustic changes at the

phonetic boundary between two categories for pho-

netic units in languages they had never experienced, whereas adults have this ability only for phonetic units in languages in which they are fluent. Japanese people, for example, find it very difficult to hear the acoustic differences between the American English /r/ and /l/ sounds. Both are perceived as Japanese /r/, and as we have seen, Japanese speakers use the two sounds interchangeably when producing words. Categorical perception was originally thought to occur only in humans, but in 1975, cognitive neuroscientists showed that it exists in nonhuman mammals

, , such as chinchillas and monkeys. Since then, many studies have confirmed this result (as well as identifying species differences between mammals and birds). These studies suggest that the evolution of phonetic units was strongly influenced by preexisting auditory structures and capacities. Infants' ability to hear all possible differences in speech prepares them to learn any language; at birth, they are linguistic "universalists." Speech production develops simultaneously with speech perception (Figure 55–2). All infants, regardless of culture, produce sounds that are universal. Infants

theorist and a strong nativist. In 1957, the behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner proposed that language was acquired through learning. In his book Verbal Behavior Skinner argued that language, like all animal behavior, was a learned behavior that developed in children as a function of external reinforcement and careful parental shaping. By Skinner's account, infants learn language as a rat learns to press a bar—through monitoring and management of reward contingencies. The nativist Noam Chomsky, writing a review of Verbal Behavior took a very different position. Chomsky argued that traditional reinforcement learning has little to do with the ability of humans to acquire language. Instead, he proposed that every individual has an innate "language faculty" that includes a universal grammar and a universal phonetics; exposure to a specific language triggers a "selection" process for one language. More recent studies of language acquisition in infants and children have clearly demonstrated that the kind of learning going on in infancy does not

resemble that described by Skinner with its reliance on external shaping and reinforcement. At the same time, a nativist account such as Chomsky's, in which the language the infant hears triggers selection of one of several innate options, also does not capture the process. The "Universalist" Infant Becomes Linguistically Specialized by Age 1

## In the early 1970s, psychologist Peter Eimas showed that infants were especially good at hearing the acoustic changes that distinguish phonetic units in the

world's languages. When speech sounds were acoustically varied in small equal steps to form a series ranging from one phonetic unit to another, say from /ba/ to /pa/, Eimas showed that infants could discern very slight acoustic changes at the locations in the series (the "boundary") where adults heard an abrupt change between the two phonetic categories, a phenomenon

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1373

"coo" with vowel-like sounds at 3 months of age and "babble" using consonant–vowel combinations at about 7 months of age. Toward the end of the first year, language-specific patterns of speech production begin to emerge in infants' spontaneous utterances. As children approach the age of 2 years, they begin to mimic the sound patterns of their native language. Chinese toddlers' utterances reflect the pitch, rhythm, and phonetic structure of Mandarin, and the utterances of British toddlers sound distinctly British. Infants develop an ability to imitate the sounds they hear others produce as early as 20 weeks of age. Very early in development, infants begin to master the subtle motor patterns required to produce their "mother tongue." Speech-motor patterns acquired in the earliest stages of language learning persist throughout life and influence the sounds, tempo, and rhythm of a second language learned later. Right before the onset of first words, infants' abilities to discriminate native and nonnative phonetic units show a dramatic shift. At 6 months of age, infants can

discriminate all phonetic units used in all languages, but by the end of the first year, they fail to discriminate phonetic changes that they successfully recognized 6 months earlier. At the same time, infants become significantly more adept at hearing native-language phonetic differences. For example, when American

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Universal speech perception Period of overlap Language-specic speech perception Detection of typical stress patterns in words Decline in foreign-language

<!-- image -->

Figure 55–2 Language development progresses through

a standard sequence in all children. Speech perception

and production in children in various cultures initially

and Japanese infants were tested between 6 and follow a language-universal pattern. By the end of the first

12 months of age on the discrimination of the American

English /r/ and /l/, American infants improved

significantly between 8 and 10 months, whereas Japanese infants declined, suggesting that this is a sensitive period for phonetic learning. Moreover, infants' native-language discrimination ability at 7.5 months of age predicts the rate at which known words, sentence complexity, and mean length of utterance grow between 14 and 30 months. If the second half of the first year is a sensitive period for speech learning, what happens when infants are exposed to a new language during this time? Do

they learn? When American infants were exposed to Mandarin Chinese in the laboratory between 9 and 10 months of age, the infants learned if exposure occurred through interaction with a human being; infants exposed to the exact same material through television or audiotape with no live human interaction do not learn (Figure 55–3). When tested, the performance of the group exposed to live speakers was statistically indistinguishable from that of infants raised in Taiwan who had listened to Mandarin for 10 months. These results established that, at 9 months of age, the right kind of exposure to a foreign language permits phonetic learning, supporting the view that this is a sensitive period for such learning. The study also demonstrated, however, that social interaction

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1374

Increase in

native-language

phonetic perception

Understands

60–90 words

First words

produced

Language-specic

speech production

year of life, language-specific patterns emerge. Speech

perception becomes language-specific before speech

production. (Adapted, with permission, from Doupe and

plays a more significant role in learning than previKuhl 1999.)

ously thought.

Further work showed that the degree to which

infants track the eye movements of the tutor—watching what she is looking at as she names objects in the for-

eign language—correlates strongly with neural measures of phonetic and word learning after exposure to the new language, again implicating social brain areas in language learning. An infant's ability to pick up social cues is essential to language learning, but what other skills promote learning during this critical period? Studies suggest

that early exposure to speech induces an implicit learning process that increases native-language discrimination and reduces the infant's innate ability to hear distinctions between the phonetic units of all other languages. Infants are sensitive to the statistical properties of the language they hear. Distributional frequency patterns of sounds affect infants' speech learning by 6 months of age. Infants begin to organize speech sounds into categories based on phonetic prototypes, the most frequently occurring phonetic units in their language. Six-month-old infants in the United States and Swe -den were tested with prototypical English and Swedish vowels to examine whether infants discriminated

acoustic variations in the vowels, like those that occur when different talkers produce them. By 6 months of age, the American and Swedish infants ignored

18/01/21 6:40 PM

Language
comprehension

Figure 55–3 Infants can learn the pho-

nemes of a nonnative language at

9 months of age.  Three groups of American

infants were exposed for the first time to a new language (Mandarin Chinese) in 12 25-minute sessions between the ages of 9 and 10.5 months. One group interacted with live native speakers of Mandarin; a second group was exposed to the identical material through television; and a third group heard tape recordings only. A control group had similar language sessions but heard only English. Performance on discrimination of Mandarin phonemes was tested in all groups after exposure (age 11 months). (Reproduced, with permission, from Kuhl, Tsao, and Liu 2003.) Left. Only infants exposed to live Mandarin speakers discriminated the Mandarin phonemes. Infants exposed through TV or

tapes showed no learning, and their performance was indistinguishable from that of control infants (who heard only English). Right. The performance of American infants exposed to live Mandarin speakers was equivalent to that of monolingual Taiwanese

infants of the same age who had experienced Mandarin from birth.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1375

<!-- image -->

Understands two-word

combinations

(e.g., "wash baby")

<!-- image -->

Live exposure Chapter 55 / Language


34 36

1,000

words

Adult-like sentence

construction

Audiovisual exposure

American infants exposed to Chinese language Monolingually raised infants



<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Language-specic speech perception

Understands basic word order

## (e.g., "mommy kiss Big Bird?")

Chance

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

acoustic variations around native language prototypes

but not with nonnative prototypes. Paul Iverson has

shown that language experience alters the acoustic fea-

tures to which speakers of different languages attend and distorts perception around category prototypes. This makes stimuli perceptually more similar to the prototype, which helps explain why 11-month-old Japanese infants fail to discriminate English /r/ and /1/ after experience with Japanese. The Visual System Is Engaged in Language Production and Perception preference for native-language words at the age of

9 months (but not at 6 months).

Prosodic cues can convey both linguistic informa-

tion (differences in intonation and tone in languages such as Chinese) and paralinguistic information, such as

## Language is ordinarily communicated through an auditory-vocal channel, but deaf individuals com-

municate through a visual-manual channel. Natural

signed languages, such as American Sign Language (Ameslan or ASL), are those invented by the deaf and vary across countries. Deaf infants "babble" with their hands at approximately the same time in development as hearing infants babble orally. Other developmental milestones, such as first words and two-word combinations, also occur on the developmental timetable of hearing infants. Additional studies indicate that visual informa tion of another kind, the face of the talker, is not only very helpful for communication but also affects the

-the emotional state of the speaker. Even in utero fetuses learn prosodic cues by listening to their mother's speech. Certain sounds are transmitted through bone conduction to the womb; these are typically intense (above 80 dB), low-frequency sounds (particularly below 300 Hz, but as high as 1,000 Hz with some attenuation). Thus, the prosodic patterns of speech, including voice pitch and the stress and intonation patterns characteristic of a particular language and speaker, are transmitted to the fetus, while the sound patterns that convey phonetic units and words are greatly attenuated. At birth, infants demonstrate having learned this prosodic information by their preference for (1) the language spoken by their mothers during pregnancy, (2) their mother's voice over that of another female, and (3) stories with a distinct tempo and rhythm read out loud by the mother during the last 10 weeks of pregnancy. Transitional Probabilities Help Distinguish Words in Continuous Speech

everyday perception of speech. We all experience the benefits of "lip reading" at noisy parties—watching speakers' mouths move helps us understand speech in a noisy environment. The most compelling laboratory demonstration that vision plays a role in everyday speech perception is the illusion that results when discrepant speech information is sent to the visual and auditory modalities. When subjects hear the syllable "ba" while watching a person pronounce "ga" they report hearing an intermediate articulation "da." Such demonstrations support the idea that speech categories are defined both auditorily and visually and that perception is governed by both sight and sound. Prosodic Cues Are Learned as Early as In Utero

Long before infants recognize that things and events

## in the world have names, they memorize the global

sound patterns typical in their language. Infants

learn such prosodic cues as pitch, duration, and loudness changes. In English, for example, a strong/weak pattern of stress is typical—as in the words "BAby," "MOMmy," "TAble," and "BASEball"—whereas in some languages, a weak/strong pattern predominates. Six- and 9-month-old infants given a listening choice between words in English or Dutch show a listening

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1376

## Seven- to 8-month-old infants learn to recognize words using the probability that one syllable will follow another. Such transitional probabilities between

syllables within a word are high because the sequential order remains fixed. In the word potato, for example, the syllable "ta" always follows the syllable "po" (probability of 1.0). Between words, on the other hand, as between "hot" and "po" in the string hot potato, are much lower transitional probabilities. Psychologist Jenny Saffran showed that infants treat phonetic units and syllables with high transitional probabilities as word-like units. In one experiment, infants

-

heard 2-minute strings of pseudo-words, such as tibudo , pabiku , golatu, and daropi, without any acoustic breaks between them. They were then tested for recognition of these pseudo-words as well as new ones formed by combining the last syllable of one word with the two initial syllables of another word (such as tudaro formed from golatu and daropi). Infants recognized the original pseudo-words but not the new combinations they had not been previously exposed to, indicating that they used transitional probabilities to identify words. These forms of learning clearly do not involve Skinnerian reinforcement. Caretakers do not man age the contingencies and gradually shape through

reinforcement the statistical analyses performed by infants. Conversely, language learning by infants also

18/01/21 6:40 PM

does not appear to reflect a process in which innately

provided options are chosen based on language experi-

ence. Rather, infants learn language implicitly through

detailed analysis of the patterns of statistical variation in the natural speech they hear and sophisticated analysis of information provided through social interaction (eg, eye gaze). The learning of these patterns in turn alters perception to favor the native language. In summary, both the statistical properties of language and the social cues provided during language interactions help infants learn. Language evolved to capitalize on the kinds of cues that infants are innately able to recognize. This mirrors the argument that the development of phonetic units was significantly influenced by the features of mammalian hearing, ensuring that infants would find it easy to discriminate phonemes, the fundamental units of meaning in language. There Is a Critical Period for Language Learning

Children learn language more naturally and efficiently

## than adults, a paradox given that the cognitive skills of adults are superior. Why should this be the case?

Many consider language acquisition to be an example of a skill that is learned best during a critical period in development. Eric Lenneberg proposed

that maturational factors at puberty cause a change in the neural mechanisms that control language acquisition. Evidence supporting this view comes from classic studies of Chinese and Korean immigrants to the United States who had been immersed in English at ages ranging from 3 to 39 years. When asked to identify errors in sentences containing grammatical mistakes, an easy task for native speakers, the responses of second-language learners declined with the age of arrival in the United States. A similar trend emerges when one compares individuals exposed to ASL from birth to those exposed between 5 and 12 years of age. Those exposed from birth were best at identifying errors in ASL, those exposed at age 5 were slightly poorer, and those exposed after the age of 12 years were substantially poorer. What restricts our ability to learn a new language after puberty? Developmental studies suggest that prior learning plays a role. Learning a native language

produces a neural commitment to detection of the acoustic patterns of that language, and this commitment interferes with later learning of a second language. Early exposure to language results in neural circuitry that is "tuned" to detect the phonetic units and prosodic patterns of that language. Neural commitment to native language enhances the ability to detect patterns based on those already learned (eg, phonetic

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1377

Chapter 55 / Language


learning supports word learning) but reduces the

ability to detect patterns that do not conform. Learn-

ing the motor patterns required to speak a language

also results in neural commitment. The motor patterns learned for one language (eg, lip rounding in French) can interfere with those required for pronunciation of a second language (eg, English) and thus can hinder efforts to pronounce the second language without an accent. Early in life, two or more languages can be easily learned because interference effects are minimal until neural patterns are well established. Neurobiologist Takao Hensch has been working on identifying the chemical switches that open and close neurodevelopmental critical periods in learning,

including those in animals and humans. Hensch has found that the neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) opens the critical period by inhibiting the firing of excitatory neurons, bringing them into balance with the firing of inhibitory neurons so as to create an excitatory–inhibitory (EI) balance. Studies testing this hypothesis in humans are difficult to conduct, but investigations on the infants of mothers who altered the EI balance of the fetus during pregnancy by taking psychotropic medications (serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SRIs]) for depression support the EI hypothesis. One of fluoxetine's off-target effects is to increase the sensitivity of some GABA receptors to GABA. When compared to infants of depressed mothers who were not exposed prenatally to SRIs and control mothers without depression or SRIs, infants exposed prenatally to SRIs showed an accelerated phonetic learning process, indicating that the well-established timing of the early transition in infants' phonetic perception can be altered. We do not completely lose the ability later in life to learn a new language, but it is far more difficult. Regardless of the age at which learning begins, second-

language learning is improved by a training regimen that mimics critical components of early learning— long periods of listening in a social context (immersion), the use of both auditory and visual information, and exposure to simplified and exaggerated speech resembling "parentese." The "Parentese" Speaking Style Enhances Language Learning

## Everyone agrees that when adults talk to their children they sound unusual. Discovered by linguists and

anthropologists in the early 1960s as they listened to

languages spoken around the world, "motherese" (or "parentese," as fathers produce it as well) is a special speaking style used when addressing infants and

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

young children. Parentese has a higher pitch, slower

tempo, and exaggerated intonation contours, and is

easily recognized. Compared to adult-directed speech,

the pitch of the voice is increased on average by an octave both in males and in females. Phonetic units are spoken more clearly and are acoustically exaggerated, thus increasing the acoustic distinctiveness of phonetic units. Adults speaking to infants exaggerate just those features of speech that are critical to their native language. For example, when talking to their infants, Chinese mothers exaggerate the four tones in Mandarin that are critical to word meaning. When given a choice, infants prefer listening to infant-directed rather than adult-directed speech. When infants are allowed to activate recordings of

infant-directed or adult-directed speech by turning their head left or right, they will turn in whatever direction is required to turn on infant-directed speech. Recent research by psychologists Nairan RamirezEsparza and Adrian Garcia-Sierra shows that the degree to which parentese is used in language spoken

to infants at 11 and 14 months of age at home is strongly correlated with a child's language development by the age of 24 months and remains strongly correlated at the age of 36 months. This relationship holds for both monolingual and bilingual children. However, in bilingual children, early advances in the two languages differ depending on the language spoken in parentese. For example, Spanish-language parentese enhances a child's behavioral and neural responses to Spanish, but not English, and vice versa. Children raised in families in which the amount of language exposure and the use of parentese are low often show deficits in language and literacy by the time they enter school, and these deficits correlate with decreased functional activation in brain areas related to language. Successful Bilingual Learning Depends on the Age at Which the Second Language Is Learned

## How does the brain handle two languages? Behavioral data show that if exposure to two languages begins at birth, children reach the milestones of language at the

same age as their monolingual peers—they coo, babble, and produce words at the benchmark ages seen in monolinguals. The idea that bilingual experience produces "confusion" has been debunked by studies that measure "conceptual" vocabulary, that is, word knowledge regardless of the language the child uses to express that knowledge. Older studies measured words in only one of the infants' two languages, and such word counts often showed decreased vocabu lary when compared to monolinguals. Conceptual

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1378

vocabulary scores show that bilingual children's

vocabulary counts meet or exceed those of their mono-

lingual peers.

Exposure to a second language after puberty shows limitations in the degree to which the new language can be learned. Whether subjects are tested on

phonological rules, morphological endings, or syntax, the ability to learn a new language appears to decline every 2 years after the age of 7 years, indicating that acquisition of a second language after puberty is quite difficult. Brain measures on bilingual infants reflect these behavioral data. Psychologist Naja Ferjan Ramirez used MEG to show that activation of the superior tem-

poral area in 11-month-old infants exposed to two languages (English and Spanish) from birth is the same for the sounds of both languages and that brain responses to English sounds are equivalent to those of agematched monolingual infants for English. Bilingual infants listening to speech also exhibit greater activation in the prefrontal cortex, a region mediating attention, when compared to monolingual infants; this finding is consistent with the fact that bilingual children (adults as well) demonstrate superior cognitive skills related to attention. Arguably, listening to two languages requires multiple shifts in attention to activate one language over another. If a second language is acquired later in development, the age at which exposure occurs and the degree of eventual proficiency affect how the brain processes

both languages. In "late" bilinguals (those who learned a second language after puberty), the second language and native language are processed in spatially separated areas in the language-sensitive left frontal region. In "early" bilinguals (those who acquired both languages as children), the two languages are processed in the same left frontal area. A New Model for the Neural Basis of

Language Has Emerged

## Numerous Specialized Cortical Regions Contribute to Language Processing

## The classical Wernicke-Geschwind neural model of language was based on the works of Broca (1861), Wernicke (1874), Lichtheim (1885), and Geschwind

-(1970). In the Wernicke-Geschwind model, acoustic cues contained in spoken words were processed in auditory pathways and relayed to Wernicke's area, where the meaning of a word was conveyed to higher brain structures. The arcuate fasciculus was assumed to

18/01/21 6:40 PM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

young children. Parentese has a higher pitch, slower

tempo, and exaggerated intonation contours, and is

easily recognized. Compared to adult-directed speech,

the pitch of the voice is increased on average by an octave both in males and in females. Phonetic units are spoken more clearly and are acoustically exaggerated, thus increasing the acoustic distinctiveness of phonetic units. Adults speaking to infants exaggerate just those features of speech that are critical to their native language. For example, when talking to their infants, Chinese mothers exaggerate the four tones in Mandarin that are critical to word meaning. When given a choice, infants prefer listening to infant-directed rather than adult-directed speech. When infants are allowed to activate recordings of

infant-directed or adult-directed speech by turning their head left or right, they will turn in whatever direction is required to turn on infant-directed speech. Recent research by psychologists Nairan RamirezEsparza and Adrian Garcia-Sierra shows that the degree to which parentese is used in language spoken

to infants at 11 and 14 months of age at home is strongly correlated with a child's language development by the age of 24 months and remains strongly correlated at the age of 36 months. This relationship holds for both monolingual and bilingual children. However, in bilingual children, early advances in the two languages differ depending on the language spoken in parentese. For example, Spanish-language parentese enhances a child's behavioral and neural responses to Spanish, but not English, and vice versa. Children raised in families in which the amount of language exposure and the use of parentese are low often show deficits in language and literacy by the time they enter school, and these deficits correlate with decreased functional activation in brain areas related to language. Successful Bilingual Learning Depends on the Age at Which the Second Language Is Learned

## How does the brain handle two languages? Behavioral data show that if exposure to two languages begins at birth, children reach the milestones of language at the

same age as their monolingual peers—they coo, babble, and produce words at the benchmark ages seen in monolinguals. The idea that bilingual experience produces "confusion" has been debunked by studies that measure "conceptual" vocabulary, that is, word knowledge regardless of the language the child uses to express that knowledge. Older studies measured words in only one of the infants' two languages, and such word counts often showed decreased vocabu lary when compared to monolinguals. Conceptual

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1378

vocabulary scores show that bilingual children's

vocabulary counts meet or exceed those of their mono-

lingual peers.

Exposure to a second language after puberty shows limitations in the degree to which the new language can be learned. Whether subjects are tested on

phonological rules, morphological endings, or syntax, the ability to learn a new language appears to decline every 2 years after the age of 7 years, indicating that acquisition of a second language after puberty is quite difficult. Brain measures on bilingual infants reflect these behavioral data. Psychologist Naja Ferjan Ramirez used MEG to show that activation of the superior tem-

poral area in 11-month-old infants exposed to two languages (English and Spanish) from birth is the same for the sounds of both languages and that brain responses to English sounds are equivalent to those of agematched monolingual infants for English. Bilingual infants listening to speech also exhibit greater activation in the prefrontal cortex, a region mediating attention, when compared to monolingual infants; this finding is consistent with the fact that bilingual children (adults as well) demonstrate superior cognitive skills related to attention. Arguably, listening to two languages requires multiple shifts in attention to activate one language over another. If a second language is acquired later in development, the age at which exposure occurs and the degree of eventual proficiency affect how the brain processes

both languages. In "late" bilinguals (those who learned a second language after puberty), the second language and native language are processed in spatially separated areas in the language-sensitive left frontal region. In "early" bilinguals (those who acquired both languages as children), the two languages are processed in the same left frontal area. A New Model for the Neural Basis of

Language Has Emerged

## Numerous Specialized Cortical Regions Contribute to Language Processing

## The classical Wernicke-Geschwind neural model of language was based on the works of Broca (1861), Wernicke (1874), Lichtheim (1885), and Geschwind

-(1970). In the Wernicke-Geschwind model, acoustic cues contained in spoken words were processed in auditory pathways and relayed to Wernicke's area, where the meaning of a word was conveyed to higher brain structures. The arcuate fasciculus was assumed to

18/01/21 6:40 PM

Table 55–1 Differential Diagnosis of the Main Types of Aphasia

Type of Capacity for repetition Other signs Chapter 55 / Language Region affected and underlying Left posterior supe- rior and middle temporal cortex Left superior tem- poral and supra- Massive left peri- Anterior or supe

aphasia Speech Comprehension

-

rior to Broca's area

Posterior or inferior

to Wernicke's area

| Broca  Nonfluent,  effortful  Largely preserved  for single words  and grammatically  simple sentences  Impaired  Right hemiparesis (arm &gt;  leg); patient aware of defect  and can be depressed  Left posterior  frontal cortex  structures  Wernicke  Fluent, abundant,  well articulated,  melodic  Impaired  Impaired  No motor signs; patient  can be anxious, agitated,  euphoric, or paranoid  Conduction  Fluent with some  articulatory  defects  Intact or largely  preserved  Impaired  Often none; patient can  have cortical sensory loss  or weakness in right arm  marginal gyri  Global  Scant, nonfluent  Impaired  Impaired  Right hemiplegia  sylvian lesion  Transcortical  motor  Nonfluent,  explosive  Intact or largely  preserved  Intact or largely  preserved  Sometimes right-sided  weakness  Transcortical  sensory  Fluent, scant  Impaired  Intact or largely  preserved  No motor signs  be a unidirectional pathway that brought information  number of cortical areas that are more widely distrib-   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

from Wernicke's area to Broca's area to enable speech

production. Both Wernicke's and Broca's areas inter-

acted with association areas. The Wernicke-Geschwind model formed the basis for a practical classification of the aphasias that clinical neurologists still use today (Table 55–1). Advancements in basic and clinical neuroscience, the advent of more sophisticated functional brain imaging tools, advanced methods for structural brain

imaging, and an increasing number of studies that combine brain and behavioral measures have resulted in the development of a new "dual-stream" model. In the dual-stream model, the processing of language is thought to involve large-scale networks that are composed of different brain areas, each with a specialized function, and the white matter tracts that connect them. This dual-stream model of language processing is similar to the well-established "what" and "where" dual-stream model of the visual system. The existence

of two cortical streams of auditory information processing was first postulated by Josef Rauschecker. Gregory Hickok and David Poeppel further elaborated the dual-stream model, and it has since been even further expanded upon by Angela Friederici as well as others studying the neurobiology of language. Figure 55–4 shows the basic components of the dual-stream model. Compared to the classic Wernicke-Geschwind model, the dual-stream model comprises a larger

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1379

uted in the brain and adds critical connecting bidirec-

tional pathways between specialized brain regions.

These improvements in the model for language processing are due to advances in structural brain imaging techniques, such as DTI and diffusion-weighted imaging, which provide quantitative measures on a microscopic scale of the white matter in fascicles that connect various cortical areas and allow for the detailed delineation of neural tracts throughout the brain (tractography). In the dual-stream model, initial spectrotemporal processing of auditory speech sounds is performed bilaterally in the auditory cortex. This information is

then communicated to the posterior superior temporal gyrus bilaterally, where phonological-level processing occurs. Language processing then diverges into a dorsal "sensorimotor stream," which maps sound to articulation, and a ventral "sensory-conceptual" stream, which maps sound to meaning. The bidirectional dorsal stream connects auditory speech information with motor plans that produce speech. The dorsal stream passes above the lateral ven-

tricles and maps sounds onto articulatory representations, connecting regions of the inferior frontal lobe, premotor cortex, and insula (all involved in speech articulation) to the region that is classically recognized as Wernicke's area. It is considered to comprise two pathways: Dorsal pathway 1 connects the posterior

18/01/21 6:40 PM



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Figure 55–4 Dual-stream model of language

processing.  Temporal and spectral analyses of

speech signals occur bilaterally in the auditory Inferior

cortex followed by phonological analysis in the posterior superior temporal gyri (yellow arrow). Processing then diverges into two separate pathways: a dorsal stream that maps speech sounds to motor programs and a ventral stream that maps speech sounds to meaning. The dorsal pathway is strongly left hemisphere dominant and has segments that extend to the premotor cortex (dorsal pathway 1) and to the posterior inferior frontal cortex (dorsal pathway 2). The ventral pathway occurs bilaterally and extends to the anterior temporal lobe and the posterior inferior frontal cortex. (Adapted, with permission, from Hickok and Poeppel 2007, and Skeide and Friederici 2016.) superior temporal gyrus to the premotor cortex, and frontal gyrus (Broca's area)

<!-- image -->

dorsal pathway 2 connects the posterior superior tem-

poral gyrus to Broca's area. Pathway 2 is involved in

higher-order analysis of speech, such as discriminating subtle differences in meaning based on grammar and interpreting language using more complex concepts. The dorsal stream is strongly left hemisphere dominant. The arcuate fasciculus and the superior longitudinal fasciculus are white matter fiber tracts that mediate communication along the dorsal stream. The ventral stream passes below the Sylvian fissure and is composed of regions of the superior and middle temporal lobes as well as regions of the posterior

inferior frontal lobe. This stream conveys information for auditory comprehension, which requires transformation of the auditory signal to representations in a mental lexicon, a "brain-based dictionary" that links individual word forms to their semantic meaning. This stream comprises the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, the uncinate fasciculus, and the extreme fiber capsule system and is largely bilaterally represented. The cortical brain regions included in the dualstream model also interact with spatially distributed regions throughout both hemispheres of the brain that

provide additional information crucial for language processing. These regions include the prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortices, which exert executive control and mediate attentional processes, respectively, as well as regions in the medial temporal, frontal, and parietal areas involved in memory retrieval. The Neural Architecture for Language Develops Rapidly During Infancy

## The study of language development in infancy requires a methodology that documents significant changes in

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1380

Dorsal pathway 1

Dorsal pathway 2

Posterior superior

temporal gyrus

(Wernicke's area)

Posterior middle

temporal gyrus

behavior and links those changes to changes in brain

function and morphology over time. Neuroimaging

methods for the infant brain have improved substan-

tially over the past decade, allowing for a detailed assessment of the progression of development of the specialized regions and structural connections required by the language network. For example, developmental neuroscientists have created models of the average infant brain and brain atlases for the infant brain at 3 and 6 months of age. These models indicate that brain structures essential to language processing in adulthood, such as the inferior frontal cortex, premotor cortex, and superior temporal gyrus, support speech processing in early infancy. Studies using DTI and tractography indicate that the arcuate fasciculus and the uncinate fasciculus connect language regions by 3 months of age. The development of the neural substrates for language in 1- to 3-day-old infants has been studied in depth by Daniela Perani using fMRI and DTI. Perani's

-

fMRI work reveals that listening to speech activates the infant superior temporal gyrus bilaterally and that in the left hemisphere this activation extends to the planum temporale, inferior frontal gyrus, and inferior parietal lobe. Perani's DTI studies of the same newborn infants demonstrate weak intrahemispheric connections, but strong connections between the hemispheres. Nevertheless, the ventral fiber tract connecting the ventral portion of the inferior frontal gyrus via the extreme fiber capsule system to the temporal cortex is evident in newborns and in both hemispheres. The dorsal pathway connecting the temporal cortex to the premotor cortex is also present in the newborns, although the dorsal tract that connects the temporal cortex to Broca's area in adults is not detectable in new borns. These early connections between sensory areas

18/01/21 6:40 PM

Premotor

cortex and the premotor cortex are important because they may allow the sensory-to-motor mapping essential for the development of early imitation of the sounds and words of the language. Jens Brauer and colleagues replicated these findings on the development of ventral and dorsal pathways in newborns, revealing the maturational primacy of the ventral connection linking temporal areas to the inferior frontal gyrus. Brauer also verified that the dorsal pathway connects the temporal and premotor cortex at birth and showed that the dorsal pathway to the inferior frontal gyrus develops later. Brauer used the same protocol with children 7 years of age and adults. In 7-year-olds, the dorsal pathway fully connects auditory areas and the inferior frontal gyrus, but in adults, it has more extensive and far-reaching connections. EEG and MEG functional brain imaging studies on young infants as early as 2 months of age show that the inferior frontal and temporal cortices, implicated in both the classical and contemporary models of language processing, are activated bilaterally by speech— syllables, words, and sentences. This finding supports the hypothesis that left hemisphere specialization increases over time, with syllables showing dominant left hemisphere specialization at the end of the first year, words by the age of 2, and sentences in middle childhood. EEG and MEG studies of young infants in which infants listen passively to native and nonnative syllables have produced results consistent with the behavio- ral transitions described earlier in this chapter. Several infant laboratories have shown that brain activity in response to speech, measured early in development, provides sensitive markers that predict language skills several years later. These studies hold promise for the eventual identification of brain measures in infants that indicate risk for developmental disabilities involving language, such as autism spectrum disorder, dyslexia, and specific language impairment. Early identification would allow earlier and more effective interventions for these impairments, improving outcomes for these children and their families. Studies using functional MEG brain imaging of infants show that at 7 months of age, native and nonnative speech syllables activate not only superior temporal regions of the infant brain but also inferior frontal regions and the cerebellum, forging an association between speech patterns they hear and the motor plans they use to babble and imitate. By 12 months of age, language experience alters the patterns of activation in both sensory and motor brain regions. Auditory activation becomes stronger for native sounds, indicating that brain areas have begun to Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1381

Chapter 55 / Language


become specialized for native language phonology.

In contrast, motor activation in both Broca's area and

the cerebellum is increased in response to nonnative

sounds, because by 12 months infants have sufficient sensorimotor knowledge to imitate native sounds and some words and have linked stored auditory patterns (words like "cup" and "ball") to the motor plans necessary to produce them. But they cannot make the sensorimotor associations for foreign-language sounds and words because the necessary motor plans cannot be generated. Therefore, we see longer and more diffuse activation as infants struggle to create the motor plans for a sound or word they have never experienced. The importance of motor learning in language development is also shown by longitudinal whole-brain voxel-based morphometry studies of 7-month-old infants showing that gray matter concentrations in the cerebellum correlate with the number of words those infants can produce at 1 year of age. Over the next 5 years, there is likely to be an explosive increase in brain studies focused on development of the language network. In a number of laborato-

ries, these brain measures will be linked to behavioral measures, enabling the creation of models that delineate how language experience alters the infant brain to increase its specialization for the language or languages to which the child is exposed. The finding that the classic brain regions known to be part of the language network in adults—in particular, the left and right temporal cortices and the left inferior frontal cortex—are already activated by speech at birth recalls Chomsky's view of innate language capabilities. The Left Hemisphere Is Dominant for Language

Current views of language processing agree that while

## the neural circuitry necessary for transforming speech sounds to meaning may be present in both hemi-

spheres, the left hemisphere is more highly specialized for language processing. This left hemisphere dominance develops with maturation and learning. Evidence from a variety of sources suggests that left hemisphere specialization for language develops rapidly in infancy. Word learning represents a case in

point. Deborah Mills and her colleagues used eventrelated potentials to track development of the neural signals generated in response to words that children knew. Her studies showed that both age and language proficiency produce changes in the strength of the neural responses to known words, as well as a change in hemisphere dominance between 13 and 20 months of age. At the earliest age studied, known words activate a broad and bilaterally distributed

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

pattern across the brain. As infants approach 20 months

and vocabulary grows, the activation pattern shifts

to become left hemisphere dominant in the tem-

poral and parietal regions. In late talkers, this shift is delayed to nearly 30 months. In 24-month-old children with autism, the degree to which this left hemisphere dominance is evident predicts children's linguistic, cognitive, and adaptive abilities at age 6. Several studies show that immersion in a second language in adulthood produces growth in the superior longitudinal fasciculus, a white matter fiber tract

that is important for language. Neuroscientist Ping Mamiya, collaborating with geneticist Evan Eichler, demonstrated, using DTI, that white matter integrity of the superior longitudinal fasciculus in the right hemisphere increased in Chinese college students in proportion to the number of days they spent in an English immersion class and decreased after immersion ended. Moreover, analysis of polymorphisms in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene showed an effect on this relationship—students with two of the variants demonstrated these changes, while students with the third variant showed no change in white matter properties with language experience. There is great interest in brain studies investigating the selectivity of the brain mechanisms underlying language. Studies in the visual system by neuroscien-

tist Nancy Kanwisher led to the suggestion that certain visual areas (the fusiform face area) are highly selective for particular stimuli, such as faces. Similar claims have been advanced for brain areas underlying speech analysis. For example, Kanwisher's group has proposed that Broca's area contains many subregions, each highly selective for particular levels of language. Additional studies on selectivity, particularly during development, will be the focus of future studies. Helen Neville and Laura-Anne Pettito have shown that the left hemisphere is activated not only by auditory stimuli but also by visual stimuli that have linguis-

tic significance. Deaf individuals process sign language in left hemisphere speech-processing regions. Such studies show that the language network processes linguistic information regardless of modality. Prosody Engages Both Right and Left Hemispheres Depending on the Information Conveyed

## Prosodic cues in language can be linguistic, conveying semantic meaning as tones do in Mandarin Chinese or Thai, as well as paralinguistic, expressing our attitudes

and emotions. The pitch of the voice carries both kinds of information, and the brain's processing of each kind of information differs.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1382

Emotional changes in pitch engage the right

hemisphere, primarily the right frontal and tempo-

ral regions. Emotional information helps convey a

speaker's mood and intentions, and this helps interpret sentence meaning. Patients with right hemisphere lesions often produce speech with inappropriate stress, timing, and intonation, and their speech sounds emotionally flat; they also frequently fail to interpret the emotional cues in others' speech. Semantic changes in pitch involve a different pattern of brain activity, as demonstrated by neuroimaging studies. Jackson Grandour used a novel

experimental design using Chinese syllables that carried either their native Chinese tone or the non -native Thai tone. fMRI results for both Chinese and Thai speakers show higher activation in the left planum temporale for syllables carrying the native tone as opposed to nonnative tone (Figure 55–5). The right hemisphere did not show this double dissociation, supporting the view that language processing occurs in the left hemisphere even for auditory signals typically processed on the right. Studies of the Aphasias Have Provided

Insights into Language Processing

## According to recent estimates, there are more than 795,000 strokes per year in the United States. Aphasia

occurs in 21% to 38% of acute strokes and increases

the probability of mortality and morbidity. In the past decade, the number of individuals with aphasia grew by more than 100,000 per year. Broca's aphasia, Wernicke's aphasia, and conduction aphasia compose the three classical models of clinical aphasia syndromes. Hickok and Poeppel describe each of these subtypes in the context of the dual-stream model. Accordingly, Broca's aphasia and conduction aphasia are due to sensorimotor integration problems related to damage to the dorsal stream of language processing, whereas Wernicke's aphasia, word deafness, and transcortical sensory aphasia are produced by damage to the ventral stream. Broca's Aphasia Results From a Large

Lesion in the Left Frontal Lobe

## Broca's aphasia is a disorder of speech production, including impairments in grammatical processing,

caused by lesions of the dorsal stream. When we

speak, we rely on auditory patterns stored in the brain. Naming a cup when presented with coffee requires a

18/01/21 6:40 PM

<!-- image -->

Figure 55–5 Brain activation for Chinese and Thai lexical

tones revealed by functional magnetic resonance imag-

ing. Language stimuli were composed of Chinese syllables

<!-- image -->

T

Chapter 55 / Language

<!-- image -->

Overlap (p &lt; 0.025)

groups occurs in the left planum temporale and the ventral pre-

central gyrus. In the left planum temporale (green crosshairs),

a double dissociation was found between tonal processing and

<!-- image -->


). language experience (bar charts). The right hemisphere (RH) did not show these effects. (Top left, coronal section; top right, sagittal section; bottom left, axial section.) (Abbreviation: ROI, region of interest.) (Adapted, with permission, from Xu et al. 2006. Copyright © 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)

Because most patients with Broca's aphasia give

superimposed with either Thai tones (C ) or Chinese tones (C Both native Chinese and native Thai speakers demonstrated a left hemisphere (LH) dominance when listening to their native tones. In the Chinese speakers, activation of the left hemisphere was stronger for Chinese tones, whereas in the Thai speakers, activation was stronger for Thai tones. Overlap for the two patient to connect the stored sensory pattern associated

with the word "cup" to the motor plans required to hit

that auditory target. With Broca's aphasia, the sensory- the impression of understanding conversational speech, the condition was initially thought to be a

-deficit of production only. But Broca's aphasics have difficulty comprehending sentences with meanings that depend mostly on grammar. Broca's aphasics can understand The apple that the girl ate was green, but have trouble understanding The girl that the boy is chasing is tall. This is because they can understand the first sentence without recourse to grammatical rules—girls eat apples but apples do not eat girls; apples can be green but girls cannot. However, they have difficulty with the second sentence because both girls and boys can be tall, and either can chase the other. To understand

18/01/21 6:40 PM

motor integration necessary for fluent speech production is damaged. Thus, speech is labored and slow, articulation is impaired, and the melodic intonation of normal speech is lacking (Table 55–2). Yet patients sometimes have considerable success at verbal com munication because their selection of certain types of words, especially nouns, is often correct. By contrast, verbs and grammatical words such as prepositions and conjunctions are poorly selected or can be missing altogether. Another major sign of Broca's aphasia is a defect in the ability to repeat complex sentences.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1383



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

Table 55–2 Examples of Spontaneous Speech Production and Repetition for the Primary Types of Aphasia

Type of aphasia Spontaneous speech Stimulus (Western Aphasia Battery picnic picture): What do you see in this

the second sentence, it is necessary to analyze its gram- Repetition Stimulus: "The pastry

"/I/ . . . no . . . In a fog."

"The baker was . . . What

("Let me repeat it: The

pastry cook was elated.")

by damage to different levels of the ventral stream, where

| picture?  cook was elated.”  Broca  “O, yea. Det’s a boy an’ a girl . . . an’ . . . a . . . car . . . house . . . light po’  (pole). Dog an’ a . . . boat. ‘N det’s a . . . mm . . . a coffee, an’ reading.  Det’s a mm . . . a . . . det’s a boy . . . fishin’.” (Elapsed time: 1 min 30 s)  “Elated.”  Wernicke  “Ah, yes, it’s, ah . . . several things. It’s a girl . . . uncurl . . . on a boat.  A dog . . . ‘S is another dog . . . Uh-oh . . . long’s . . . on a boat. The lady, it’s a  young lady. An’ a man a They were eatin’. ‘S be place there. This . . . a tree! A  boat. No, this is a . . . It’s a house. Over in here . . . a cake. An’ it’s, it’s a lot of  water. Ah, all right. I think I mentioned about that boat. I noticed a boat being  there. I did mention that before. . . . Several things down, different things  down . . . a bat . . . a cake . . . you have a . . .” (Elapsed time: 1 min 20 s)  Conduction  “Kay. I see a guy readin’ a book. See a women /ka . . . he . . . /pourin’ drink  or something. An’ they’re sittin’ under a tree. An’ there’s a . . . car behind that  an’ then there’s a house behind th’ car. An’ on the other side, the guy’s flyn’  a /fait . . . fait/(kite). See a dog there an’ a guy down on the bank. See a flag  blowin’ in the wind. Bunch of /hi . . . a . . . /trees in behind. An a sailboat on  th’ river, river . . . lake. ‘N guess that’s about all. . . . ‘Basket there.” (Elapsed  time: 1 min 5 s)  was that last word?”  “The baker-er was /  vaskerin/ . . . uh . . .”  Global  (Grunt)  (No response)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

matical structure, something that Broca's aphasics

have difficulty doing.

Broca's aphasia results from damage to Broca's area (the left inferior frontal gyrus); the surrounding frontal fields; the underlying white matter, insula, and

basal ganglia; and a small portion of the anterior superior temporal gyrus (Figure 55–6). A small sector of the insula, an island of cortex buried deep inside the cerebral hemisphere, can also be included among the neural correlates of Broca's aphasia. Broca's aphasics typically have no difficulty perceiving speech sounds or recognizing their own errors and no trouble in coming up with words. When damage is restricted to Broca's area alone or to its subjacent white matter, the result is the condition of Broca's area aphasia, a milder version of true Broca's aphasia, from which many patients are able to recover. Wernicke's Aphasia Results From Damage to Left Posterior Temporal Lobe Structures

## Wernicke's aphasics have difficulty comprehending the sentences uttered by others, and damage occurs in areas of the brain that subserve grammar, attention,

and word meaning. Wernicke's aphasia can be caused

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1384

auditory information is linked to word knowledge. It is

usually caused by damage to the posterior section of

the left auditory association cortex, although in severe cases, the middle temporal gyrus and white matter are involved (Figure 55–7). Patients with Wernicke's aphasia can produce speech at a normal rate that sounds effortless, melodic, and quite unlike that of patients with Broca's apha-

sia. But speech can be unintelligible as well because Wernicke's aphasics often shift the order of individual sounds and sound clusters. These errors are called phonemic paraphasias (a paraphasia is substitution of an erroneous phoneme for the correct one). Even when individual sounds are normally produced, Wernicke's aphasics have great difficulty selecting words that accurately represent their intended meaning (known as a verbal or semantic paraphasia). For example, a patient might say headman when they mean president. Conduction Aphasia Results From Damage to a Sector of Posterior Language Areas

## Conduction aphasia, like Broca's aphasia, is thought to involve the dorsal stream. Speech production and auditory comprehension are less compromised than

18/01/21 6:40 PM


<!-- image -->

Figure 55–6 Sites of lesions in Broca's aphasia. (Images

used with permission of Hanna and Antonio Damasio.)

<!-- image -->

A. Top: A three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

B. Top: A three-dimensional MRI overlap of lesions in 13

patients with Broca's aphasia (red indicates that lesions in five

or more patients share the same pixels). Bottom: A coronal

reconstruction of a lesion (infarction) in the left frontal operculum (dark gray) in a patient with Broca's aphasia. Bottom: A coronal MRI section of the same brain through the damaged area.

<!-- image -->

MRI section of the same composite brain image through the damaged area.


Figure 55–7 Sites of lesions in Wernicke's aphasia. (Images

reproduced, with permission, from Hanna and Antonio Damasio.)

<!-- image -->

A. Top: Three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

reconstruction of a lesion (an infarction) in the left posterior and superior temporal cortex (dark gray) in a patient with Wernicke's aphasia. Bottom: Coronal MRI section of the same brain through the damaged area.

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1385

B. Top: Three-dimensional MRI overlap of lesions in 13 patients

with Wernicke's aphasia obtained with the MAP-3 technique

(red indicates that five or more lesions share the same pixels).

Bottom: Coronal MRI section of the same composite brain image through the damaged area.

18/01/21 6:40 PM

Chapter 55 / Language



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

in the two other major aphasias, but patients cannot

repeat sentences verbatim, cannot assemble phonemes

effectively (and thus produce many phonemic para-

phasias), and cannot easily name pictures and objects (Table 55–2). Conduction aphasia is caused by damage to the left superior temporal gyrus and the inferior parietal lobe. The damage can extend to the left primary

auditory cortex, the insula, and the underlying white matter. Large lesions in the Sylvian parietal temporal area, situated in the middle of the network of auditory and motor regions, are consistent with the idea that the damage occurs in the dorsal stream. Damage to left hemisphere auditory regions often produces speech production deficits, supporting the idea that sensory systems participate in speech production. Such lesions interrupt the interfaces linking auditory representations of words and the motor actions used to produce them. The damage compromises white matter (dorsal stream) and affects feedforward and feedback projections that interconnect areas of temporal, parietal, insular, and frontal cortex. Global Aphasia Results From Widespread Damage to Several Language Centers

## Patients with global aphasia are almost completely unable to comprehend language or formulate and repeat sentences, thus combining features of Broca's,

Wernicke's, and conduction aphasias. Speech is reduced to a few words at best. The same word might be used repeatedly, appropriately or not, in a vain attempt to communicate an idea. Nondeliberate ("automatic") speech may be preserved, however. This includes stock expletives (which are used appropriately and with normal phonemic, phonetic, and inflectional structures), routines such as counting or reciting the days of the week, and the ability to sing previously learned melodies and their lyrics. Auditory comprehension is limited to a small number of words and idi omatic expressions. Classic global aphasia involves damage to the inferior frontal and parietal cortices (as seen in Broca's aphasia), the auditory cortex and the insula (as seen in Transcortical Aphasias Result From Damage to Areas Near Broca's and Wernicke's Areas

## Aphasias can be caused by damage not only to speech centers of the cortex but also to pathways that connect

those components to the rest of the brain. Transcortical

aphasia can be either motor or sensory. Patients with transcortical motor aphasia speak nonfluently, but they can repeat sentences, even very long sentences. Transcortical motor aphasia has been linked to damage to the left dorsolateral frontal area, a patch of association cortex anterior and superior to Broca's area, although there can be substantial damage to Broca's area itself. The left dorsolateral frontal cortex is involved in the allocation of attention and the maintenance of higher executive abilities, including the selection of words. Transcortical motor aphasia can also be caused by damage to the left supplementary motor area, located high in the frontal lobe, directly in front of the primary

motor cortex and buried mesially between the hemispheres. Electrical stimulation of the area in nonaphasic surgery patients causes the patients to make involuntary vocalizations or to be unable to speak, and functional neuroimaging studies have shown it to be activated during speech production. Thus, the supplementary motor area appears to contribute to the initiation of speech, whereas the dorsolateral frontal regions contribute to ongoing control of speech, particularly when the task is difficult. Transcortical sensory aphasics have fluent speech, impaired comprehension, and great trouble naming things. These patients have deficits in semantic

retrieval, without significant disruption of syntactic and phonological abilities. Transcortical motor and sensory aphasias are caused by damage that spares the arcuate fasciculus and the dorsal stream. Transcortical aphasias are

-thus the complement of conduction aphasia, behaviorally and anatomically. Transcortical sensory aphasia appears to be caused by damage to the ventral stream, affecting parts of the junction of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes, which connect the perisylvian language areas with the parts of the brain responsible for word meaning. Less Common Aphasias Implicate Additional

Brain Areas Important for Language

## Several other language-related regions in the cerebral cortex and subcortical structures, for example, the anterior temporal and inferotemporal cortex, have

only recently become associated with language. Damage to the left temporal cortex causes severe and pure

18/01/21 6:40 PM

conduction aphasia), and the posterior superior temporal cortex (as seen in Wernicke's aphasia). Subcortical regions, such as the basal ganglia, are often affected as well. Such widespread damage is typically caused by a stroke in the region supplied by the middle cerebral artery. Weakness in the right side of the face and paralysis of the right limbs accompany classic global aphasia.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1386

naming defects—impairments of word retrieval with-

out any accompanying grammatical, phonemic, or

phonetic difficulty.

When the damage is confined to the left temporal pole, the patient has difficulty recalling the names of unique places and persons but not the names of com-

mon things. When the lesions involve the mid-temporal sector, the patient has difficulty recalling both unique and common names. Finally, damage to the left posterior inferotemporal sector causes a deficit in recalling Chapter 55 / Language


words for particular types of items—tools and

utensils—but not words for natural or unique things.

Recall of words for actions or spatial relationships is

not compromised (Figure 55–8). The left temporal cortex contains neural systems that hold the key to retrieving words denoting various categories of things ("tools," "eating utensils"),

but not words denoting actions ("walking," "riding a bicycle"). These findings were obtained not only from studies of patients with brain lesions resulting from

A Defective naming of unique images

Broca's area

<!-- image -->

Figure 55–8 Regions of the brain other than

Broca's and Wernicke's areas involved in lan

guage processing. Functional magnetic reso-

nance imaging was used to study patients with selected brain lesions. (Images reproduced, with permission, from Hanna and Antonio Damasio.) A. The region of maximal overlap of lesions associated with impaired naming of unique images, such as the face of a person, is the left

- anterior temporal pole. B. The sites of maximal overlap of lesions associated with impaired naming of nonunique animals are the left anterolateral and posterolateral
- temporal regions as well as Broca's region. C. The sites of maximal overlap of lesions associated with deficits in naming of tools are the left sensorimotor cortex and left posterolateral
- temporal cortex.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1387

<!-- image -->

Left anterolateral

and posterolateral

temporal regions

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Left posterolateral

temporal region

<!-- image -->

18/01/21 6:40 PM
naming defects—impairments of word retrieval with-

out any accompanying grammatical, phonemic, or

phonetic difficulty.

When the damage is confined to the left temporal pole, the patient has difficulty recalling the names of unique places and persons but not the names of com-

mon things. When the lesions involve the mid-temporal sector, the patient has difficulty recalling both unique and common names. Finally, damage to the left posterior inferotemporal sector causes a deficit in recalling Chapter 55 / Language


words for particular types of items—tools and

utensils—but not words for natural or unique things.

Recall of words for actions or spatial relationships is

not compromised (Figure 55–8). The left temporal cortex contains neural systems that hold the key to retrieving words denoting various categories of things ("tools," "eating utensils"),

but not words denoting actions ("walking," "riding a bicycle"). These findings were obtained not only from studies of patients with brain lesions resulting from

A Defective naming of unique images

Broca's area

<!-- image -->

Figure 55–8 Regions of the brain other than

Broca's and Wernicke's areas involved in lan

guage processing. Functional magnetic reso-

nance imaging was used to study patients with selected brain lesions. (Images reproduced, with permission, from Hanna and Antonio Damasio.) A. The region of maximal overlap of lesions associated with impaired naming of unique images, such as the face of a person, is the left

- anterior temporal pole. B. The sites of maximal overlap of lesions associated with impaired naming of nonunique animals are the left anterolateral and posterolateral
- temporal regions as well as Broca's region. C. The sites of maximal overlap of lesions associated with deficits in naming of tools are the left sensorimotor cortex and left posterolateral
- temporal cortex.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1387

<!-- image -->

Left anterolateral

and posterolateral

temporal regions

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Left posterolateral

temporal region

<!-- image -->

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

stroke, head injury, herpes encephalitis, and degenera-

tive processes such as Alzheimer disease, but also from

functional imaging studies of typical individuals and

from electrical stimulation of these same areas of tem -poral cortex during surgery. Areas of frontal cortex in the mesial surface of the left hemisphere, which include the supplementary motor area and the anterior cingulate region, play an

important role in the initiation and continuation of speech. Damage in these areas impairs the initiation of movement (akinesia) and causes mutism, a complete absence of speech. In aphasic patients, the complete absence of speech is a rarity and is only seen during the very early stages of the condition. Patients with akinesia and mutism fail to communicate by words, gestures, or facial expression because the drive to communicate is impaired, not because the neural machinery of expression is damaged as in aphasia. Damage to the left subcortical gray nuclei impairs grammatical processing in both speech and comprehension. The basal ganglia are closely interconnected

with the frontal and parietal cortex and may have a role in assembling morphemes into words and words into sentences, just as they serve to assemble the components of a complex movement into a smooth action. Highlights

1. Language exists at many levels, each of which has

to be mastered during childhood—the elemental

phonetic units (vowels and consonants) used to

- change the meaning of a word, the words themselves, word endings (morphemes) that change tense and pluralization, and the grammatical rules that allow words to be strung together to create sentences with meaning. By the age of 3, young children, regardless of the language(s) they are learning, have mastered all levels and can carry on a conversation with an adult. No artificially intelligent machine can yet duplicate this feat. 2. The learning strategies used by children to master language under 1 year of age are surprising. Language learning proceeds as infants (1) exploit
- the statistical properties of speech (distributional frequency patterns of sounds to detect relevant phonetic units and transitional probabilities between adjacent syllables to detect likely words), and (2) exploit the social context in which language occurs by following the eye movements of adults as they refer to objects and actions to learn word–object and word–action correspondences.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1388

At early ages, natural language learning requires a

social context and social interaction. Infants' strat

-

egies are not well described by Skinnerian operant

conditioning or by Chomsky's innate representation and selection based on experience. Instead, powerful implicit learning mechanisms that operate in social contexts vault infants forward from the very earliest months of life. 3. Infants' speech production and speech perception skills are "universal" at birth. In speech perception, infants discriminate all sounds used to

- distinguish words across all languages until the age of 6 months. By 12 months, discrimination for native-language sounds has dramatically increased, whereas discrimination of foreignlanguage sounds decreases. Production is initially universal as well and becomes language specific by the end of the first year. By the age of 3, infants know 1,000 words. Mastery of grammatical structure in complex sentences continues until the age of 10. Future work will advance the field by linking the detailed behavioral milestones that now exist to functional and structural brain measures to show how the brain's network for language is shaped as a function of language experience. 4. A new "dual-stream" model of language has emerged based on advances in functional neural imaging and structural brain imaging over the
- past decade. The new model bears similarities to the dual-stream model for the visual system. The dual-stream model for language goes beyond the classic Wernicke-Geschwind model by showing that numerous brain regions and the neural pathways that connect them support sound-to-meaning (ventral) and sound-to-articulation (dorsal) pathways. Refinement in the model will continue as additional studies show relationships between behavioral and brain measures. Future studies will integrate structural and functional brain measures, genetic measures, and behavioral assessments of language processing and of learning, including second language learning in adulthood. 5. Studies on the infant brain reveal a remarkably well-developed set of brain structures and pathways by 3 to 6 months of age. Structural DTI
- reveals a fully formed ventral pathway at birth and a dorsal pathway that links auditory areas to premotor, but not Broca's, area at birth. EEG and MEG brain imaging studies mirror the transition in phonetic perception between 6 and 12 months of age, a "critical period" for sound learning. MEG

18/01/21 6:40 PM

brain scans at this period reveal the co-activation

of auditory and motor centers when infants hear

speech and show changes in both sensory and

motor brain areas as a function of experience. The data indicate that dorsal pathways are sufficiently well formed in the first year to support sensory-tomotor connections and imitation learning during this period. 6. Hemispheric specialization generally increases with age and language experience, with initial representation of the areas and pathways repre-

- sented bilaterally and dominance emerging with language experience. There are differences in the degree of lateralization, however, for various levels of language. The dorsal stream, which mediates auditory-motor representations of speech, is more left lateralized than the ventral stream, which mediates auditory-conceptual representations of words. 7. The classical aphasias—Broca's, Wernicke's, and conduction aphasia—are well described within the context of the dual-stream model of language.
- Broca's aphasia, with its emphasis on the inability to produce speech but relatively good speech understanding, is seen as a dorsal stream deficit, whereas Wernicke's aphasia, with its emphasis on speech comprehension deficits, is seen as a ventral stream deficit. Conduction aphasia, like Broca's, is viewed as caused by a dorsal stream deficit, with damage that encompasses auditory and motor regions. Future research on aphasia will benefit from additional studies of functional and struc tural damage that can be combined with detailed behavioral protocols. 8. Future studies will allow detailed comparisons between human and nonhuman brains to reveal the structures and pathways that are uniquely

Chapter 55 / Language


experience is linked to advanced language devel-

opment by the time children enter school. This

may lead to language interventions that improve

- outcomes for all children.

Selected Reading

Brauer J, Anwander A, Perani D, Friederici AD. 2013. Dorsal

and ventral pathways in language development. Brain

## Lang 127:289–295.

- Buchsbaum BR, Baldo J, Okada K, et al. 2011. Conduction aphasia, sensory-motor integration, and phonological short-term memory—an aggregate analysis of lesion and
- fMRI data. Brain Lang 119:119–128. Chomsky N. 1959. A review of B. F. Skinner's "Verbal Behavior." Language 35:26–58. Damasio H, Tranel D, Grabowski TJ, Adolphs R,
- Damasio AR. 2004. Neural systems behind word and concept retrieval. Cognition 92:179–229.
- Doupe A, Kuhl PK. 1999. Birdsong and human speech: common themes and mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 22:567–631.
- Gopnik A, Meltzoff AN, Kuhl PK. 2001. The Scientist in the Crib: What Early Learning Tells Us About the Mind. New York: HarperCollins.
- -Hickok G, Poeppel D. 2007. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:393–402. Iverson P, Kuhl PK, Akahane-Yamada R, et al. 2003. A per-
- ceptual interference account of acquisition difficulties for non-native phonemes. Cognition 87:B47–B57.
- human and subserve language. Future work will also focus on the degree to which language structures in humans are selectively activated by speech as opposed to other complex auditory sounds and whether adult-level selectivity is present early in development. 9. Human language represents a unique aspect of human cognitive achievement. Understanding the brain systems that allow this cognitive feat
- in nearly all children, and especially the discovery of biomarkers that identify children who are at risk for developmental disorders of language, will advance brain science and be beneficial for society. Behavioral studies now allow us to connect the dots with regard to how early language

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1389

- Kuhl PK. 2004. Early language acquisition: cracking the speech code. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:831–843. Kuhl PK, Rivera-Gaxiola M. 2008. Neural substrates of lan-
- guage acquisition. Annu Rev Neurosci 31:511–534. Kuhl PK, Tsao F-M, Liu H-M. 2003. Foreign-language experi-
- ence in infancy: effects of short-term exposure and social interaction on phonetic learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 100:9096–9101. Kuhl PK, Williams KA, Lacerda F, Stevens KN, Lindblom B. 1992. Linguistic experience alters phonetic perception in infants by 6 months of age. Science 255:606–608.
- Perani D, Saccuman MC, Scifo P, et al. 2011. Neural lan -guage networks at birth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:16056–16061.
- Pinker S. 1994. The Language Instinct. New York: William Morrow. Skeide MA, Friederici AD. 2016. The ontogeny of the cortical
- language network. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:323–332.

18/01/21 6:40 PM

Patricia K. Kuhl


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition

References

Berwick RC, Friederici AD, Chomsky N, Bolhuis JJ. 2013.

Evolution, brain, and the nature of language. Trends Cogn

Sci 17:89–98.

- Broca P. 1861. Remarques sur le siege de la faculte du langage articule, suivies d'une observation d'aphemie (perte de la parole). Bull Societe Anatomique de Paris 6:330–357.
- Buchsbaum BR, Baldo J, Okada K, et al. 2011. Conduction aphasia, sensory-motor integration, and phonological short-term memory: an aggregate analysis of lesion and
- fMRI data. Brain Lang 119:119–128. Burns TC, Yoshida KA, Hill K, Werker JF. 2007. The development of phonetic representation in bilingual and monolingual infants. App Psycholing 28:455–474.
- Damasio AR, Damasio H. 1992. Brain and language. Sci Am 267:88–109. Damasio AR, Tranel D. 1993. Nouns and verbs are retrieved
- with differently distributed neural systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90:4957–4960.
- Dronkers NF, Baldo JV. 2009. Language: aphasia. In: LR Squire (ed). Encyclopedia of Neuroscience (Vol. 5), pp. 343–348. Oxford: Academic Press.
- Dubois J, Hertz-Pannier L, Dehaene-Lambertz G, Cointepas Y, Le Bihan D. 2006. Assessment of the early organization and maturation of infants' cerebral white matter
- fiber bundles: a feasibility study using quantitative diffusion tensor imaging and tractography. Neuroimage 30: 1121–1132. Eimas PD, Siqueland ER, Jusczyk P, Vigorito J. 1971. Speech perception in infants. Science 171:303–306. Fedorenko E, Duncan J, Kanwisher N. 2012. Language-selective
- and domain-general regions lie side by side within Broca's area. Curr Biol 22:2059–2062.
- Ferjan Ramirez N, Ramirez RR, Clarke M, Taulu S, Kuhl PK. 2017. Speech discrimination in 11-month-old bilingual and monolingual infants: a magnetoencephalography
- study. Dev Sci 20:e12427. Flege JE. 1995. Second language speech learning: theory, findings, and problems. In: W Strange (ed). Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience, pp. 233–277. Timonium,
- MD: York Press. Flege JE, Yeni-Komshian GH, Liu S. 1999. Age constraints on second-language acquisition. J Mem Lang 41:78–104. Friederici AD. 2009. Pathways to language: fiber tracts in the
- human brain. Trends Cog Sci 13:175–181. Garcia-Sierra A, Ramirez-Esparza N, Kuhl PK. 2016. Rela-
- tionships between quantity of language input and brain responses in bilingual and monolingual infants. Int J
- Psychophysiol 110:1–17. Geschwind N. 1970. The organization of language and the brain. Science 170:940–944. Golfinopoulos E, Tourville JA, Guenther FH. 2010. The
- integration of large-scale neural network modeling and functional brain imaging in speech motor control. Neuro-
- image 52:862–874. Hickok G, Okada K, Serences JT. 2009. Area Spt in the human planum temporale supports sensory-motor integration for speech processing. J Neurophysiol 101:2725–2732.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1390

Johnson J, Newport E. 1989. Critical period effects in second

language learning: the influence of maturational state on

the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognit

- Psychol 21:60–99. Knudsen EI. 2004. Sensitive periods in the development of the brain and behavior. J Cogn Neurosci 16:1412–1425. Kuhl PK. 2000. A new view of language acquisition. Proc
- Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11850–11857. Kuhl PK, Andruski J, Christovich I, et al. 1997. Cross-language
- analysis of phonetic units in language addressed to infants. Science 277:684–686.
- Lenneberg E. 1967. Biological Foundations of Language. New York: Wiley. Lesser RP, Arroyo S, Hart J, Gordon B. 1994. Use of sub-
- dural electrodes for the study of language functions. In: A Kertesz (ed). Localization and Neuro-Imaging in Neuropsy-
- chology, pp. 57–72. San Diego: Academic Press. Liu H-M, Kuhl PK, Tsao F-M. 2003. An association between mothers' speech clarity and infants' speech discrimination skills. Dev Sci 6:Fl–F10.
- Mamiya PC, Richards TL, Coe BP, Eichler EE, Kuhl PK. 2016. Brain white matter structure and COMT gene are linked to second-language learning in adults. Proc Natl Acad Sci
- U S A 113:7249–7254. Mills DL, Coffey-Corina SA, Neville HJ. 1993. Language acquisition and cerebral specialization in 20-month-old infants. J Cogn Neurosci 5:317–334.
- Miyawaki K, Jenkins JJ, Strange W, Liberman AM, Verbrugge R, Fujimura O. 1975. An effect of linguistic experience: the discrimination of /r/ and /l/ by native speakers
- of Japanese and English. Percept Psychophys 18:331–340. Neville HJ, Coffey SA, Lawson D, Fischer A, Emmorey K, Bellugi U. 1997. Neural systems mediating American Sign Language: effects of sensory experience and age of acqui-
- sition. Brain Lang 57:285–308. Newport EL, Aslin RN. 2004. Learning at a distance I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies. Cogn Psychol 48:127–162.
- Peterson SE, Fox PT, Posner MI, Mintun M, Raichle ME. 1988. Positron emission tomographic studies of the cortical anatomy of single-word processing. Nature 331:585–589.
- Petitto LA, Holowka S, Sergio LE, Levy B, Ostry DJ. 2004. Baby hands that move to the rhythm of language: hearing babies acquiring sign language babble silently on the
- hands. Cognition 93:43–73. Poeppel D. 2014. The neuroanatomic and neurophysiological infrastructure for speech and language. Curr Opin Neurobiol 28:142–149.
- Price CJ. 2012. A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading. Neuroimage 62:816–847.
- Pulvermüller F, Fadiga L. 2010. Active perception: sensorimotor circuits as a cortical basis for language. Nat Rev Neurosci 11:351–360.
- Raizada RD, Richards TL, Meltzoff A, Kuhl PK. 2008. Socio -economic status predicts hemispheric specialisation of the left inferior frontal gyrus in young children. Neuroimage
- 40:1392–1401.

18/01/21 6:40 PM

Ramirez-Esparza N, Garcia-Sierra A, Kuhl PK. 2014. Look

who's talking: speech style and social context in language

input are linked to concurrent and future speech develop-

- ment. Dev Sci 17:880–891. Rauschecker JP. 2011. An expanded role for the dorsal auditory pathway in sensorimotor control and integration. Hear Res 271:16–25.
- Saffran JR, Aslin RN, Newport EL. 1996. Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science 274:1926–1928. Saur D, Kreher BW, Schnell S, et al. 2008. Ventral and dor-
- sal pathways for language. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:18035–18040.
- Silva-Pereyra J, Rivera-Gaxiola M, Kuhl PK. 2005. An event related brain potential study of sentence comprehension in preschoolers: semantic and morphosyntactic process-
- ing. Cogn Brain Res 23:247–258. Skinner BF. 1957. Verbal Behavior. Acton, MA: Copley Publishing Group. Tsao F-M, Liu H-M, Kuhl PK. 2004. Speech perception
- in infancy predicts language development in the second year of life: a longitudinal study. Child Dev 75:
- 1067–1084.

Kandel-Ch55\_1370-1391.indd 1391

Chapter 55 / Language


Weikum WM, Oberlander TF, Hensch TK, Werker JF. 2012.

Prenatal exposure to antidepressants and depressed

maternal mood alter trajectory of infant speech percep-

- tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:17221–17227. Weisleder A, Fernald A. 2013. Talking to children matters: early language experience strengthens processing and builds vocabulary. Psychol Sci 24:2143–2152.
- Wernicke C. 1874. Der Aphasische Symptomenkomplex: Eine Psychologische Studie auf Anatomischer Basis. Breslau: Cohn und Weigert.
- Xu Y, Gandour J, Talavage T, et al. 2006. Activation of the left planum temporale in pitch processing is shaped by language experience. Hum Brain Mapp 27:173–183.
- Yeni-Komshian GH, Flege JE, Liu S. 2000. Pronunciation proficiency in the first and second languages of Korean– English bilinguals. Biling Lang Cogn 3:131–149.
- Zatorre RJ, Gandour JT. 2008. Neural specializations for speech and pitch: moving beyond the dichotomies. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:1087–1104.
- Zhao TC, Kuhl PK. 2016. Musical intervention enhances infants' neural processing of temporal structure in music and speech. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:5212–5217.

18/01/21 6:40 PM


Decision-Making and Consciousness

Perceptual Discriminations Require a Decision Rule

A Simple Decision Rule Is the Application of a Threshold

to a Representation of the Evidence

## Perceptual Decisions Involving Deliberation

Mimic Aspects of Real-Life Decisions Involving Cognitive Faculties

Neurons in Sensory Areas of the Cortex Supply the Noisy Samples of Evidence to Decision-Making Accumulation of Evidence to a Threshold Explains the Speed

Versus Accuracy Trade-Off Neurons in the Parietal and Prefrontal Association Cortex

Represent a Decision Variable Perceptual Decision-Making Is a Model for Reasoning From

Samples of Evidence Decisions About Preference Use Evidence About Value

Decision-Making Offers a Framework for Understanding Thought Processes, States of Knowing, and

States of Awareness

Consciousness Can be Understood Through the Lens of Decision Making Highlights


motor output through the higher-order cognitive pro-

cess of decision-making. In doing so, we are afforded

a glimpse of the building blocks of higher thought and

consciousness. Outside neuroscience, the term cognitive typically connotes some distinction from reflexes and dedicated routines, and yet as we shall see, neuroscience recog-

nizes the rudiments of cognition in simple behaviors that display two types of flexibility—contingency and freedom from immediacy. Contingency means that a stimulus does not command or initiate an action in the way it does for a reflex. A stimulus might motivate a particular behavior, but the action may be delayed, pending additional information, or it may never occur. This freedom from immediacy of action means there are operations that transpire over time scales that are not immediately beholden to changes in the environment or the real-time demands of control of the body. Both types of flexibility—contingency and time— are on display when we make decisions. Of course, not all decisions invoke cognition. Many behavioral

n the earlier chapters, we have seen how sensory

input is transformed into neural activity that is

then processed by the brain to give rise to immedi-

ate percepts and how those percepts can be stored as short- and long-term memories (Chapters 52–54). We have also examined in detail how movement is con trolled by the spinal cord and brain. Here, we begin to consider one of the most challenging aspects of neuroscience: the transformation of sensory input to

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1392

routines—swimming, walking, feeding, and grooming— have branch points that may be called decisions, but they proceed in an orderly manner without much flexibility or control of tempo. They are governed mainly by the time steps of nervous transmission and are dedicated for the most part to particular input–output relationships. The point of drawing these distinctions is not to establish sharp boundaries around decisionmaking, but to help us focus on aspects of decisions that make them a model for cognition. For present purposes, we will use the following definition: A decision is a commitment to a proposition, action, or plan based on evidence (sensory input), -

19/01/21 9:33 AM

prior knowledge (memory), and expected outcomes.

The commitment is provisional. It does not necessitate

behavior, and it can be modified. We can change our

mind. The critical component is that some consideration of evidence leads to a change in the state of the organism that we liken to a provisional implementation of an action, strategy, or new mental process. Such propositions can be represented as a plan of action: I decide to turn to the right, to leave safe shelter, to look for water, to choose a path least likely

to encounter a predator, to approach a stranger, or to seek information in a book. The concept of a plan emphasizes freedom from immediacy. Moreover, not all plans come to fruition. Not all thought leads to action, but it is useful to conceive of thought as a type of plan of action. This view invites us to consider knowing as the result of directed—mostly nonconscious— interrogation, rather than an emergent property of neural representations. Decision-making has been studied in simple organisms, notably worms, flies, bees, and leeches, as well as in mammals from mice to primates. Simpler organisms

are appealing because they have smaller nervous systems, but they lack the behavioral repertory required to study decisions that entail forms of cognition. The hope is that the biological insights from these species will inform our understanding of the processes characterized in mammals, especially primates. This is a laudable goal because, to paraphrase Plato, decisionmaking offers our best shot at carving cognitive function at its joints—to identify the common principles that support its normal function and to elucidate their mechanisms so they may be repaired in disease. In this chapter, we focus primarily on perceptual decisions made by primates in contrived settings. The principles extend naturally to reasoning from evidence

and to value-based decisions concerning preference. In the last part of the chapter, we derive insights about broader aspects of cognition. Viewed through the lens of decision-making, brain states associated with knowing and being consciously aware may be closer to a neurobiological explanation than is commonly thought. Perceptual Discriminations Require

a Decision Rule

## Until recently, decision-making was studied primarily by economists and political scientists. However, psy-

chologists and neuroscientists working in the field of

perception have been long concerned with decisions. Indeed, the simplest type of decision involves the

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1393

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


detection of a weak stimulus, such as a dim light or a

faint sound, odor, or touch. The decision a subject must

make is whether or not the stimulus is present—yes

or no. In the laboratory, there is no uncertainty about where and when the stimulus is likely to be present. Such experiments were therefore used to infer the fundamental sensitivities of a sensory system from behavior, a subfield of psychology known as psychophysics. Detection experiments played a role in inferring signalto-noise properties of sensory neurons that transduce light touch, faint sounds, and dim lights. In the last case, such experiments provided evidence that the visual system is capable of detecting the dimmest of light, a single photon, subject to background noise of photoreceptors. In other words, it is as efficient as possible, given the laws of physics. The psychophysical investigation of perception began with Ernst Weber and Gustav Fechner in the 19th century. They were interested in measuring the

smallest detectable difference in intensity between two sensory stimuli. Such measurements can reveal fundamental principles of sensory processing without ever recording from a neuron. It turns out they also lay the foundation for the neuroscience of decisionmaking, because every yes/no answer is a choice based on the sensory evidence. In Chapter 17, we learned how psychophysicists conceptualize the detection problem (Box 17–1). On any one trial, the state of the world is either stimulus

present or stimulus absent. The decision is based on a sample of noisy evidence. If the stimulus is present, the evidence is a random sample drawn from the probability distribution of signal + noise. If the stimulus is absent, the evidence is a sample from the noiseonly distribution (Figure 56–1A). The brain does not directly perceive a stimulus but receives a neural representation of the sample. As a result, some of the noise arises from the neural activity involved in forming this representation. It is the job of the brain to decide from which distribution the sample came, using information encoded in neural firing rates. However, the brain does not have access to the distributions, just the one sample involved in each given decision. It is the separation of these distributions—the degree that they do not overlap—that determines the discriminability of a stimulus from noise. The decision rule is to say "yes" if the evidence exceeds some criterion or threshold. A Simple Decision Rule Is the Application of a Threshold to a Representation of the Evidence

## The criterion instantiates the decision-maker's policy or strategy. If the criterion is lax—that is, the threshold

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A

B

Criterion 1 Criterion 2

Cancer

23 Hz

utter

<!-- image -->

Figure 56–1 The framework of signal detection theory

formalizes the relationship between evidence and deci-

sions. In panels A through C, we consider simple yes–no

decisions in which a decision-maker receives just one measurement. A. The height of the curves represents the probability of observing a measurement on the x-axis (be it number of spikes per second, radioactive counts, or blood pressure) under two

conditions: signal present or absent. In both cases, the measurement is variable, giving rise to the spread of possible values associated with the two conditions. If the signal is present, the decision-maker receives a random sample from the Signal + noise probability distribution (red). If the signal is absent, the decision-maker receives a sample from the Noise only probability distribution (blue). The decision arises by comparing the measure to a criterion, or threshold, and answering yes or no signal is present or absent, if the value is greater or less than the criterion. B. The criterion is an expression of policy, as illustrated in medical decision-making. Suppose the measure is derived from calcifications detected in a screening mammogram—a score or not) is liberal. It leads to many false positives (83%), but very few women with cancer receive a negative result. Criterion

2 (right line) is conservative. It would miss many cases of

cancer, but it would rarely render a positive result to a healthy person. That would make sense if a positive decision were rationale for a dangerous (or painful) procedure. C. The receiver operating characteristic shows the combination of proportions of "yes" decisions that are correct (hit rate) and incorrect (false alarm rate) for all possible criteria. The liberal

and conservative criteria are shown by the black and gray symbols, respectively. D. The framework also applies to decisions between two alternatives. Here, the decision is whether a vibration applied to the index finger has a higher frequency than a vibration applied a

, few seconds before. The same depiction of overlapping distributions might conform to neural responses from some part of the brain that represents a sensory stimulus. For example, a neuron in the somatosensory cortex might respond over many individual trials with a higher average spike rate to vibratory stimulation of the finger at 23 Hz than stimulation at 20 Hz. However, the distributions overlap so that on any given presentation we cannot say with 100% certainty whether the vibration was at 20 Hz or 23 Hz based on the neuron's response.

combining number, density, and shape. The criterion 1 (left line) for interpreting the test as a positive or negative (breast cancer

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1394

19/01/21 9:33 AM

is low—the decision-maker will rarely fail to detect the

stimulus, but they will often respond "yes" on the tri-

als when there was no stimulus because the background

noise exceeds the threshold. This type of error is called a f false alarm. If the criterion is more conservative—that is, the threshold is high—the decision-maker will rarely say "yes" when the stimulus is absent but will often say "no" when the stimulus is present. This type of error is called a miss. The appropriate criterion depends on the relative cost of the two types of errors and also on the design of the experiment. For example, if the stimulus is present on 90% of trials, then a lax criterion might be warranted since false alarms will be rare. The policy ought to be influenced by a value or cost associated with making correct and incorrect decisions. For example, in medical diagnosis, it is often the

case that a disease affects only a small fraction of the population, but a diagnostic test does not discriminate perfectly between people with and without the disease. We can illustrate this using the distribution of mammogram calcification scores. The scores are larger in women with breast cancer than in healthy women, but the range of values overlaps to an extent, implying that the test is not perfect (Figure 56–1B). In this situation, a lax criterion might seem problematic because it would produce a large number of false alarms: patients who are healthy but told they

might have a disease based on the test. However, it may well be the case that a miss is life threatening, whereas a false alarm leads to a stressful week as the patient awaits a more decisive test. In this situation, it is actually sensible to apply a lax criterion even if it leads to many false alarms. Alternatively, a false alarm may trigger a painful or risky procedure, in which case a more stringent criterion would be more appropriate. The medical analogy allows us to appreciate the strategic roles of the criterion setting. We praise and criticize decision-makers based on their policy, not on the noisy imperfections of the measurements. The important point is that the criterion represents a decision rule, which instantiates knowledge about the problem and an attitude about the positive value

associated with making correct choices (hits and correct rejections) and the negative value of making errors (misses and false alarms). Note that the application of different criteria does not change the fundamental characteristic of the evidence samples that is responsible for the accuracy of decisions. This is reflected by the overlap between the blue and red distributions, which does not change if a decision-maker adjusts her criterion. The curve in Figure 56–1C, termed the receiver operating characteristic (ROC), shows how changing the criterion affects the accuracy of the decision whether a

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1395

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


stimulus (or cancer) is present or absent for all possible

criteria. Each point on the curve is an ordered pair of the

probability of a correct "yes" response (hits) versus an

erroneous "yes" response (false alarms) associated with a given criterion (threshold). The ROC tells us something about the reliability of the measurement (ie, the separation between the two distributions) regardless of how the decision-maker uses it. The criterion tells us something about the decision-maker's policy. It bears on why two decision-makers receiving the same evidence might reach different decisions. Indeed, it is the policy, not the noise, that the decision-maker controls and for which she may be praised or criticized, that is, held responsible. We will think about this topic again when we discuss the trade-off between speed and accuracy. The challenge for neuroscience is to relate the terms signal , noise, and criterion to neural representations of sensory information and operations upon those repre-

sentations that result in a choice. We will develop these connections in subsequent sections. Here, we wish to seed an important insight about the term noise as it pertains to the neural representations of evidence. Decision-makers do not make the same decision even when confronting repetitions of identical facts or sensory stimuli. Some variability at some stage must creep into the process. The distinction between signal and noise need not devolve into scholastic arguments about chance and determinism. Any source of variance in the representation of the evidence is effectively noise if it is responsible for errors. If the brain did not distinguish such variability from the signal and thus made a mistake, we would be justified in construing this variability as unaccounted by the decision-maker. Perceptual Decisions Involving Deliberation Mimic Aspects of Real-Life Decisions Involving

Cognitive Faculties

## The neural bases for more cognitive decisions have been examined by extending simple perceptual decisions in three ways: first, by moving beyond detection

to a choice between two or more competing alternatives; second, by requiring the decision process to take time by involving consideration of many samples of evidence; and third, by considering decisions about matters involving values and preferences. Vernon Mountcastle was the first to study perceptual decisions as a choice between two alternative interpretations of a sensory stimulus. He trained

monkeys to make a categorical decision about the frequency of a fluttering pressure applied lightly to a fingertip (Figure 56–2). Since the vibratory flutter has an intensity that is easily detected, the decision is not

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Push buttons

Stimulator greater than 20 Hz. Mountcastle favored the idea that the brain obtained two samples of evidence—one accompa- nying the 20-Hz reference and the second from the test.

<!-- image -->

Push button The decision, higher or lower, could arise by evaluating the inequality—greater than or less than—or, equivalently, by subtracting the two samples and answering based on the sign of the difference. This was a terrific insight, but the neural recordings were out of step with the theory. Mountcastle's neural recordings explained the monkey's ability to detect vibratory stimulation as a function of intensity and frequency (Chapter 17)—a yes/no decision—but they were unable to explain the mechanism for the comparison between the two alternatives, whether f2 is greater or less than f1. Two key elements were missing. First, to evaluate f2 versus f1, the brain needs a representation of frequency. Mountcastle found neurons in the somatosensory cortex

tral nervous system. A 20-Hz vibratory stimulus is applied to and thalamus with firing rates that were phase-locked to frequencies of the flutter, and they could measure the reliability of this frequency locking, but they did not find neurons that were tuned to particular frequencies less than or greater than 20 Hz. Second, both representations need to be available at the same time in order to compare them. However, the neural responses to f1 lasted only as long as the flutter vibration. Mountcastle failed to observe neural responses that conveyed the representation of the reference frequency through the delay period up to the time that the test stimulus was presented. It was therefore impossible to study the neural operations corresponding to the decision process, which seemed to require some trace of the reference stimulus during analysis of the test. These obstacles were overcome using a simpler task design and a different sensory modality. Inspired by Mountcastle, William Newsome trained monkeys

the finger on the right hand; following a delay period of several seconds, a second vibratory stimulus is applied. The monkey indicates whether the second vibration (f2) was at a higher or lower frequency than that of the first stimulus (f1) by pushing the left or right button with the other hand. The plots show that the proportion of trials in which the monkey decided that the comparison stimulus was greater than the reference depended on the magnitude and sign of the difference. With larger differences, the monkey almost always chose correctly, but when the difference was small, the choices were often incorrect. (Adapted from Romo and Salinas 2001.) about whether the stimulus is present or absent but

whether the vibration rate is fast or slow. On every trial

of the experiment, the monkey experienced a reference

frequency, f1, equal to 20 cycles per second (Hz). The pressure cycles are too fast to count; they feel more like a buzzing. The reference was then turned off, and after a few seconds, a second test stimulus, f2, was applied. The frequency of f2 was chosen from a range of values from 10 to 30 Hz. The monkey was rewarded for indicating whether the test frequency was higher or lower than the f1 reference. We can represent the process conceptually using the same type of signal and noise distributions we drew for the detection problem (Figure 56–1D). Here, the "noise-

only" distribution represents a quantity that is sampled in association with the 20-Hz reference, whereas the red distribution represents a quantity that is sampled in association with a test stimulus with a flutter frequency

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1396

to decide whether a field of dynamic random dots had a tendency to move in one direction or its opposite (eg, left or right). The random dot motion stimulus is constructed such that at one easy extreme all dots share the same direction of motion, say to the right. At the other easy extreme, all dots move to the left, and in between, the direction can be difficult to discern because many dots contribute only noise (Figure 56–3A). Unlike the flutter vibration task, where a decision is rendered difficult by making the comparison frequencies more similar, the two directions of motion

remain fixed and opposite for all levels of difficulty. The two directions were rendered less distinct by degrading the signal-to-noise ratio of the random dots. Each random dot appears only briefly, and then either reappears at a random location or at a displacement to support a consistent direction and speed. The probability of the latter (displacement) determines the motion

19/01/21 9:33 AM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Push buttons

Stimulator greater than 20 Hz. Mountcastle favored the idea that the brain obtained two samples of evidence—one accompa- nying the 20-Hz reference and the second from the test.

<!-- image -->

Push button The decision, higher or lower, could arise by evaluating the inequality—greater than or less than—or, equivalently, by subtracting the two samples and answering based on the sign of the difference. This was a terrific insight, but the neural recordings were out of step with the theory. Mountcastle's neural recordings explained the monkey's ability to detect vibratory stimulation as a function of intensity and frequency (Chapter 17)—a yes/no decision—but they were unable to explain the mechanism for the comparison between the two alternatives, whether f2 is greater or less than f1. Two key elements were missing. First, to evaluate f2 versus f1, the brain needs a representation of frequency. Mountcastle found neurons in the somatosensory cortex

tral nervous system. A 20-Hz vibratory stimulus is applied to and thalamus with firing rates that were phase-locked to frequencies of the flutter, and they could measure the reliability of this frequency locking, but they did not find neurons that were tuned to particular frequencies less than or greater than 20 Hz. Second, both representations need to be available at the same time in order to compare them. However, the neural responses to f1 lasted only as long as the flutter vibration. Mountcastle failed to observe neural responses that conveyed the representation of the reference frequency through the delay period up to the time that the test stimulus was presented. It was therefore impossible to study the neural operations corresponding to the decision process, which seemed to require some trace of the reference stimulus during analysis of the test. These obstacles were overcome using a simpler task design and a different sensory modality. Inspired by Mountcastle, William Newsome trained monkeys

the finger on the right hand; following a delay period of several seconds, a second vibratory stimulus is applied. The monkey indicates whether the second vibration (f2) was at a higher or lower frequency than that of the first stimulus (f1) by pushing the left or right button with the other hand. The plots show that the proportion of trials in which the monkey decided that the comparison stimulus was greater than the reference depended on the magnitude and sign of the difference. With larger differences, the monkey almost always chose correctly, but when the difference was small, the choices were often incorrect. (Adapted from Romo and Salinas 2001.) about whether the stimulus is present or absent but

whether the vibration rate is fast or slow. On every trial

of the experiment, the monkey experienced a reference

frequency, f1, equal to 20 cycles per second (Hz). The pressure cycles are too fast to count; they feel more like a buzzing. The reference was then turned off, and after a few seconds, a second test stimulus, f2, was applied. The frequency of f2 was chosen from a range of values from 10 to 30 Hz. The monkey was rewarded for indicating whether the test frequency was higher or lower than the f1 reference. We can represent the process conceptually using the same type of signal and noise distributions we drew for the detection problem (Figure 56–1D). Here, the "noise-

only" distribution represents a quantity that is sampled in association with the 20-Hz reference, whereas the red distribution represents a quantity that is sampled in association with a test stimulus with a flutter frequency

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1396

to decide whether a field of dynamic random dots had a tendency to move in one direction or its opposite (eg, left or right). The random dot motion stimulus is constructed such that at one easy extreme all dots share the same direction of motion, say to the right. At the other easy extreme, all dots move to the left, and in between, the direction can be difficult to discern because many dots contribute only noise (Figure 56–3A). Unlike the flutter vibration task, where a decision is rendered difficult by making the comparison frequencies more similar, the two directions of motion

remain fixed and opposite for all levels of difficulty. The two directions were rendered less distinct by degrading the signal-to-noise ratio of the random dots. Each random dot appears only briefly, and then either reappears at a random location or at a displacement to support a consistent direction and speed. The probability of the latter (displacement) determines the motion

19/01/21 9:33 AM

A

Fixation

direction or its opposite (eg, right or left).


Motion onset

A. The monkey maintains its gaze on a cross while viewing the random dot motion display. When the stimulus and fixation cross are extinguished, the monkey indicates its decision by

<!-- image -->

- shifting the gaze to the left or right choice targets and receives a reward if the decision is correct. B. The difficulty of the decision is controlled by the coherence of dot motion. Each dot appears for only a few milliseconds at
- strength, which is commonly expressed on a 0 to 100

scale, termed the percentage coherence. At the most

difficult extreme, 0% coherence, all dots are plotted at

random locations in each successive frame, giving the appearance of dancing snowflakes with no dominant direction. At intermediate levels of difficulty, the dancing snowflakes give rise to a weak sense that the wind might be blowing them ever so slightly to the right or left. Any one dot is unlikely to be displaced more than once, so there is no feature to track. This simple stimulus was originally developed by Anthony Movshon to promote a decision strategy that would benefit from integrating visual informa-

tion across its spatial extent and as a function of time. Moreover, it satisfied another desideratum: The same neurons should inform the decision at all levels of difficulty. For a left versus right decision, directionselective neurons in the visual cortex that are, say, sensitive to leftward motion emit signals that are relevant to the decision at all levels of difficulty. That would not be the case if difficulty were controlled by the angular difference between the two directions. Another

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1397

6 13 25 50 100

Motion strength (% coherence)

a random location and then reappears 40 ms later, either at a

new random location or at a displacement consistent with a

chosen speed and direction. The probability that a dot present

at time t1 t1 undergoes displacement in the same direction at t2 t2 establishes the motion strength (% coherence). (Reproduced, with permission, from Britten et al. 1992. Copyright © 1992 Society for Neuroscience.) C. The decision is more likely to be correct when the motion is stronger.

advantage of this task over the vibration-flutter task

is that there is only one stimulus presentation. There

is no need to remember anything between a refer-

ence and a test stimulus. Finally, humans and monkeys perform this task at nearly identical levels. They answer perfectly for the strong-motion trials and make more errors when the strength of motion is reduced (Figure 56–3C). This establishes a platform for a quantitative reconciliation of decisions and neural activity. Is there a way to explain the likelihood that a decision will be accurate from measurements of the signal-tonoise ratio in the appropriate sensory neurons? Neurons in Sensory Areas of the Cortex

Supply the Noisy Samples of Evidence to

Decision-Making

## In higher mammals and primates, neurons that respond differentially to the direction of motion are

first encountered in the primary visual cortex (area V1).

They are a subset of the orientation-tuned simple

19/01/21 9:33 AM

Saccade Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness




Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

and complex cells discovered by Hubel and Wiesel

(Chapter 22). These neurons project to a secondary

visual cortical area, area MT.


Area MT contains a complete map of the contralateral visual field, and almost all the neurons in area MT are direction selective. Neurons with similar direction

preferences cluster together so that MT contains a map of both space and motion direction at each point in the visual field. Their receptive fields are larger than those of V1 neurons, and some manifest properties that are not evident in V1 (eg, pattern motion; Chapter 23), but most respond as if they integrate signals from V1 that share the same direction selectivity over a larger patch of the visual field. In Newsome's experiments, the random dot motion stimulus was contained in a circular aperture that matched the size of an MT neuron's receptive field. It was thus possible to measure the response of a neuron perfectly situated to convey evidence to the decision process on single trials. It seemed possible that the neurons with receptive fields aligned to the random dot motion stimulus and a firing preference for one or the other direction under

consideration might contribute the evidence used to make the decision. Indeed, we can begin to understand the monkey's perception of motion by applying the same signal-to-noise considerations to the MT neural responses. We consider two types of directionselective neurons (Figure 56–4). One type responds better to rightward motion than to leftward motion, and it yields higher firing rates when the rightward motion is stronger. It also responds above baseline to the 0% coherence stimulus because the random noise contains all motion directions including leftward and rightward, and it yields lower firing rates (compared to 0% coherence) when the leftward motion is stronger (Figure 56–4B). The other type of neuron responds well to leftward motion. It exhibits the same pattern as the right-preferring type, only with the direction preferences reversed. The neural responses are noisy, so the firing rates on any trial or in any epoch may be conceptualized as a random draw from one of the distributions in Figure 56–4C. These distributions can be interpreted in two ways. The two curves might represent the possible firing rates of a rightward-preferring neuron when weak motion is to the right or left, respectively. They


The letters MT stand for middle temporal, a sulcus in the species

of New World monkey in which the area was first discovered. This

sulcus does not exist in Old World monkeys and humans, but the

homologous area does, and it retains its original name. Area MT is sometimes referred to as area V5 (the fifth visual area) in humans. The name is unimportant, but the area is!

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1398

might also represent the possible firing rates of right-

and left-preferring neurons, respectively, to the same

weak rightward stimulus.

Because the responses of the two classes of neurons are available at the same time, we are able to characterize the evidence as the difference between the firing

rates of the left- and right-preferring neurons. (The brain in fact relies on the difference between the aver -ages from many left- and many right-preferring neurons.) We refer to such a quantity as a decision variable because the decision could be made by applying a criterion to this difference. Here, the criterion would be at zero. Thus, if the decision variable is positive, answer right; if it is negative, answer left. Notice that when the stimulus is purely random (0% coherence), there is no correct answer. The monkey is rewarded randomly by the experimenter on a

random half of the trials, and the monkey answers right and left with about equal probability. This is not because the monkey is guessing but because fluctuation in the random dot motion stimulus and the noisy firing rates of the right- and left-preferring neurons lead to variability in the evidence used to make the decision. This makes sense because the right- and leftpreferring neurons respond equivalently to this type of stimulus. On some trials, the right-preferring neurons respond more than the left-preferring neurons, and the brain interprets this as evidence for rightward motion. On other trials, the left-preferring neurons respond more and the monkey chooses left. Neuroscientists have been able to use a network of small populations of neurons to model the relation between the accuracy of an animal's choice versus

motion strength, known as the psychometric function . The success of such models gives support to the idea that the signal and noise properties of cortical neurons can explain the fidelity of a perceptual decision, just as Mountcastle had hoped. This achievement was possible because of a clever experimental design that allowed the same neuron to participate in decisions across a wide range of difficulty. But are these neurons actually used to make the decision? Do they actually supply the noisy evidence that the monkey uses to make its decision? We now know that they do. Because of the columnar organization of direction-selective neurons in area MT, it is possible to apply small currents through a

microelectrode to excite a cluster of neurons sharing the same receptive field property. Newsome and colleagues placed the electrode in the middle of a cluster of neurons with receptive fields that were exactly aligned to the random dot motion stimulus. He reasoned that at weak stimulating currents the majority of stimulated

19/01/21 9:33 AM

Figure 56–4 Neurons in area MT provide noisy

evidence bearing on the direction of motion.

A. Responses from a right-preferring neuron during

## the discrimination task. The random dot movie is in the receptive field of the neuron. The panels in the left

- column of the 2 × 2 panel display show the neuron's responses to motion in its preferred direction, and panels in the right column show its responses to the nonpreferred direction. The panels in the top row show the neuron's responses to strongly coherent motion, and the bottom panels show the responses to weakly coherent motion. In each panel, the time of each action potential (spike) is represented by a small vertical tick mark. Each row of spikes in a panel shows the neuron's response to the motion stimulus in a single trial. (Adapted with permission from Mazurek et al. 2003.) B. The mean firing rate varies as a function of motion strength. The neuron increases its firing rate above baseline even in response to the 0% coherence
- stimulus because the dynamic random dots contain all directions of motion, including the neuron's preferred direction. The firing rate then increases with stronger rightward motion. It decreases, relative to the response to 0% coherence, with stronger leftward motion. The responses of this right-preferring neuron to leftward motion are mirrored by the responses of a left-preferring neuron to rightward motion. C. Probability distributions of the firing rates from left-preferring and right-preferring neurons to weak rightward motion. The right-preferring neuron tends
- to respond more, but the overlap of the distributions shows that it is possible for the left-preferring neuron to respond more than the right-preferring neuron on any given trial. These same considerations apply to the pooled signals from populations of right- and leftpreferring neurons. The plot on the right shows the distribution of the difference between firing rates of the left-preferring neuron and the right-preferring neuron measured in response to the same stimulus over many trials. The decision is to choose right if this difference is positive and to choose left if it is negative. This rule would lead to correct rightward choices on 80% of the trials.

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1399

Responses to

weak rightward Choose right

<!-- image -->

0 30

19/01/21 9:33 AM

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness

MT

A Single trial responses from a right-preferring neuron

Preferred direction (right)

<!-- image -->

## Receptive

eld Nonpreferred direction (left)

<!-- image -->

400 ms

Response of right-preferring

neurons to rightward motion

Response of left-preferring

neurons to rightward motion

C Noisy evidence for left and right are conceptualized as random samples

<!-- image -->

5 spikes/s

- 5 spikes/s



Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

neurons were likely to share the same receptive field

and the same direction preference. Newsome had the

monkey decide between this direction and its oppo-

site. For example, if these neurons preferred rightward motion, the weak currents caused the monkey to decide more often in favor of right (Figure 56–5). We now refer to such weak stimulation, designed to affect a cluster of neurons within a 50- to 100μm radius, as microstimulation. Notably, microstimulation

100 did not cause a hallucination of visual motion. It biased the monkey's decisions, which were guided mainly by the random dot motion stimulus. The monkey did not respond when the stimulus was not shown, and microstimulation did not affect the monkey's decisions when the random dots were presented at a location of the visual field outside the receptive field of the stimulated neurons. The microstimulation exerted its largest effect on choices when the motion strength was weakest. The stimulated neurons simply added a small amount of evidence for rightward motion, which is effectively evidence against leftward motion, as discussed below.

The microstimulation experiment shows that the

direction-selective neurons in area MT contribute

evidence to the perceptual decision. However, the

stimulated neurons do not necessarily need to affect the decision directly; they only have to participate in a neural circuit that lies in a causal chain. In addition, many more neurons in MT were not affected by the electrical stimulation but nonetheless responded to the same random dot patch in the same directionselective manner. They are in other columns with receptive fields that are not centered on the stimulus but overlap it. If the electrode is moved to stimulate these neurons, they too cause the monkey to choose the preferred direction more often. These findings imply that in any one experiment the microstimulation only affects a small fraction of the neurons that contribute to the decision. Most respond at their usual firing rates to the random dot motion. The microstimulation only changes the total signal that the brain uses to make its decision by a small amount. No wonder the effect is only evident when the decision is difficult. There is an important principle to be learned here. Had Newsome used only the easier conditions, the electrical stimulation would have yielded a null effect, and

<!-- image -->

decide that motion is rightward. In the experiment, an elec-

trode is placed in the middle of a patch of neurons in area MT that prefer the same direction of motion, say rightward. The random dot motion is shown in the receptive field of these neurons. A weak alternating current is applied on half of the trials during the presentation of the random dots movie. The amount of current activates about 200 to 400 neurons within 50 to 100 μm of the electrode tip. On trials with microstimulation, the monkey is more likely to choose the preferred direction of the simulated neurons. The effect is most pronounced when the decision is more difficult (middle red arrow). (Adapted, with permission, from Ditterich, Mazurek, and Shadlen 2003.)

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1400

Stronger rightward motion thus, the causal relationship between the neural activity and behavior would not have been established. The same pattern of effects has recently been established using techniques to turn neurons off. Silencing induces a bias in choices against the direction of the silenced neurons, but this too is only apparent on trials when the motion is difficult. Without evidence for sufficiency or necessity, a neuroscientist might conclude that the neurons in MT do not cause changes in perceptual decisions. This would be a mistake, notably one that is likely to be made in any experiment in which perturbations are restricted to a subset of the neurons involved in a computation. That is the rule, not the exception, for studies of higher cortical functions. It is only mitigated by studying behavior in conditions when a small difference to the total pool of neural signals might make a difference, as in the difficult (low signal-to-noise) regime employed in Newsome's experiments. To summarize so far, the perceptual decision arises from a simple decision rule: the application of a criterion to the noisy evidence supplied by noisy direction-selective

neurons in the visual cortex. We have characterized the noisy evidence as a single number: the difference in the mean firing rates from two opposing pools of directionselective neurons. This account leaves out two important points: The operations that establish the decision variable must be carried out by neurons that receive information directly or indirectly from area MT, and these operations take time. As we will see, time is the key to understanding

19/01/21 9:33 AM

decision-making, and it is also the factor that relates

decision-making to higher cognitive function.

Accumulation of Evidence to a Threshold

Explains the Speed Versus Accuracy Trade-Off

## The decision rule considered so far is appropriate if the brain received only a brief snapshot of the motion, say

for a tenth of a second. However, decision-making nor-

mally takes some time, so that when the viewing duration is longer, decisions tend to be more accurate. In fact, the strength of motion that is required to support 75% accuracy, termed the sensory threshold, decreases as a function of viewing duration. With more time, the decision-maker can achieve this level of accuracy with a weaker motion strength. Put another way, the sensitivity to weak motion improves as a function of viewing duration, t. Indeed, the sensitivity improves as a function of the square root of time ( t ), which is the rate of improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio that one obtains by accumulating or averaging. The suggestion then is that the difference in firing rates of left- and right-preferring direction-selective neurons supplies the momentary evidence to another process that accumulates this noisy evidence as a function of time—in this case, two processes that accumulate evidence for left and right, respectively. The accumulation of noisy evidence follows a path comprising random steps in both the positive and negative direction on top of a constant bias determined by

the coherence and direction of the moving dots. This is termed a biased random walk or drift plus diffusion process (Figure 56–6). Because evidence for left is evidence against right (and vice versa), the two random walks are anticorrelated, albeit imperfectly so. The accumulations evolve with time and continue to do so until the stimulus is turned off or until one of the accumulations reaches an upper stopping bound, which determines the answer, left or right. Even the 0% coherence (pure noise) stimulus will reach a stopping bound eventually, but it is equally likely that the left or right accumulation will do so. When the random dot motion favors one direction, it is more likely that the corresponding accumulation determines the choice, and increasingly so with stronger motion. Such accumulations of noisy evidence are dynamic versions of the decision variable. The decision rule remains similar: Choose right if there is more evidence for right than left, and vice versa. The stopping bounds also explain another important feature of the decision—the time it takes to make it. This simple idea thus explains the observed tradeoff between the speed and accuracy of a decision. It

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1401

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


specifies the exact relationship between the probability

that each motion strength will lead to a correct choice

and the amount of time that is taken, on average, to

respond, termed the reaction time (Figure 56–6C). If the stopping bounds are close to the starting point of the accumulation, the decision will be based on very little evidence—fast but error prone. If the stopping bounds are further from the starting point, more accumulated evidence is needed to stop—slower but more likely to be correct. If the flow of information is cut off before either bound has been reached, the decision-maker may feel she has not yet reached an answer, but may nonetheless answer based on the accumulation that is closer to its stopping bound. This mechanism, termed bounded evidence accumulation, explains the effect of task difficulty on choice accuracy and the associated reaction times on a variety of perceptual tasks. It explains the degree of confidence that a decision-maker has in a decision and why such confidence depends on both the amount of evidence and deliberation time. It also explains the rate of improvement in accuracy when the experimenter controls viewing duration by t, mentioned above, and it explains why this improvement saturates with longer viewing durations. The brain stops acquiring additional evidence when the accumulated evidence reaches a stopping bound. Neurons in the Parietal and Prefrontal Association

Cortex Represent a Decision Variable

## Neurons in several parts of the brain, including the parietal and prefrontal cortices, change their firing rates

to represent the accumulation of evidence—in the case

of visual motion from area MT—bearing on the direction decision. The neurons that represent the accumulation differ from sensory neurons in two important ways. First, they can continue to respond for several seconds after a sensory stimulus has come and gone. Moreover, they seem to be capable of holding a firing rate at one level and then increasing or decreasing that level when new information arrives. This is exactly the type of feature one would like to see in a neuron that represents the accumulation of evidence. Second, such neurons tend to be associated with circuits that control the behavioral response that the monkey has learned to use to communicate its decision. Such neurons were first identified for their capacity to maintain persistent activity in the absence of a sensory stimulus or ongoing action. They were therefore thought to play a role in working (short-term) memory, planning an action, or maintaining attention at a location in the visual field (Figure 56–7).

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

A

Choose LEFT

<!-- image -->

Saccade

<!-- image -->

Figure 56–6 The speed and accuracy of a decision are

explained by a process of evidence accumulation.

A. A decision and the time it takes to reach it are both Behavior


5 10 20 40

Motion strength (% coherence)

<!-- image -->

same noisy samples of evidence to both accumulations via

the visual cortex. They are not perfectly anticorrelated because

right- and left-preferring neurons introduce additional noise.

explained by the accumulation of evidence, as a function of time, until there is sufficient evidence to terminate the deci

sion in favor of one or the other choice. The cartoon illustrates

-Were the anticorrelation perfect (eg, if all the noise comes from the motion stimulus), the two processes could be represented by one accumulation that terminates at either an upper or lower stopping bound. B. In a choice-reaction time task, the decision-maker reports a decision whenever ready with an answer. In this case, the monkey signals its choice by the direction of a saccade.

-C. Graphs show a typical data set. In addition to the proportion of correct choices, the reaction time (RT), the time from onset of motion to the beginning of the eye movement

response, also depends on the strength of motion. The total length of RT is the time to reach a decision, explained by the process in A, plus the time required to convey sensory information from the stimulus to the neurons that compute the decision and the time required to convert the decision to a motor response. (Adapted, with permission, from Gold and Shadlen 2007.)

a decision for rightward motion because the "choose right" accumulation was the first to reach the stopping bound (thick gray lines). Because the evidence is noisy, the accumulations resemble biased random walks, also known as drift-diffusion processes. For the decision between left and right motion, there are two accumulations. The one shown on the left accu mulates evidence for left and against right. The one shown on the right accumulates evidence for right and against left. For this process, the bias (or drift rate) is the mean of the evidence samples depicted by the distribution of differences (right minus left) in Figure 56–4C. The process is a random walk because even if the motion is rightward, left-preferring neurons in area MT might respond more than right-preferring neurons at any instant. The two processes tend to evolve in an anticorrelated fashion because the random dot motion stimulus supplies the

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1402

Accumulated

<!-- image -->


Choose RIGHT

19/01/21 9:33 AM

It seemed possible that neurons whose activity rep-

resents a plan to act might also represent the formation

of that plan during decision making. For example, if a Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


against right) reaches their threshold and terminates the

decision process when the monkey answers left (Figure

56–6A). The neurons that favor the right choice simply

-stop accumulating evidence at a time determined by the left choice neurons. This explains why the downward traces in Figure 56–8 do not reach a common level of activity around the time of the eye movement. It is not yet known where in the brain the threshold operation is applied. Computational theorists have proposed that a likely candidate is the striatum, a brain area involved in selecting between competing actions (Chapter 38), but there are many other candidate structures, including movement areas of the cortex and brainstem. Area LIP is not the only part of the brain that represents the accumulation of evidence toward a decision, and LIP itself is not limited to making decisions about

monkey has learned to answer "rightward" by moving its hand to a target on a touch screen, the neurons of interest will tend to be active in association with that movement and they will decrease their activity if the monkey plans to reach to the opposite "leftward" target. Those neurons project to brain areas that command reach movements. If the monkey has learned to answer with an eye movement, the neurons that help to plan eye movements to the choice-target represent the decision variable. Such neurons have been studied exten sively in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP). Indeed, these LIP neurons provided neuroscientists with the first view of a decision process as it unfolds in time. Neurons that represent the evolving decision increase their firing rates gradually as the evidence mounts for one of the choices, and they decrease

gradually when the evidence favors the other option (Figure 56–8). Their firing rates, plotted as a function of time, approximate a ramp: a baseline rate plus a constant multiplied by time, where the constant is proportional to the strength of the momentary evidence (eg, the average difference in the firing rates of the right- and left-preferring MT neurons). This captures the average firing rates across many trials, but it leaves out the critical point that the decision variable is an accumulation of both signal and noise. The signal is the mean of the difference. The noise is the variance— that is, the spread around the mean. The accumulated noise is obscured by the averaging in Figure 56–8, but it is apparent in the variability of firing rates across multiple decisions. The responses start at a common level and evolve as the brain acquires more and more information, until something stops the process. A neural signature of the random dot motion. Many neurons in the parietal and prefrontal cortex exhibit persistent firing. In fact, the first brain areas shown to exhibit this type of activity were in the frontal lobe, rostral to the primary motor cortex, and some neurons with this property were found in the motor cortex itself. The persistent activity was thought to represent working memory for a location in space or a rule, category, or plan of action, as discussed in Chapter 52. But these neurons are also capable of representing graded levels of activity, suggesting a capacity to represent more analog quantities, like an evolving decision variable, the expected value of making an action, or working memory of a sensory quality, as we next consider. Twenty years after Mountcastle published his studies of flutter-vibration discrimination, his student Ranulfo Romo rejuvenated this line of research

stopping rule is apparent in the responses aligned to the eye movement itself. The firing rate appears to reach the same level on trials that take as little as a few tenths of a second and trials that take as much as a full second. The level is achieved less than a tenth of a second before the eyes start to move. Of course, it takes less time to achieve this level if the firing rates are increasing at a rapid pace (eg, solid red trace in Figure 56–8). This suggests that the brain terminates the decision when the representation of accumulated evidence reaches a threshold. That is exactly what the bounded accumulation framework predicts. There appears to be no common level of activity in neurons that signal a rightward movement when the monkeys choose the opposite direction. Instead, another population of neurons that accumulate evidence for left (and

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1403

by focusing on neurons in the prefrontal cortex, which had the kind of persistent activity we have been discussing. Romo modified the task. The monkeys were still presented with two vibrating stimuli, separated by a delay, and were required to decide whether the vibration frequency of the second stimulus (f2) was greater or less than the vibration frequency of the first stimulus (f1). However, instead of using the same 20-Hz reference stimulus on all trials, the flutter frequency was varied across trials. He found that many neurons in the prefrontal cortex respond in a graded and persistent manner to the frequency of the first flutter-vibration stimulus during the delay period while the monkey awaited the second stimulus. Some neurons increased their firing rate as a function of the vibration frequency of f1, while others were more active with lower fre -quencies. These persistent neural responses were not observed by Mountcastle in his original studies. There is evidence that a decision variable is constructed in the ventral premotor cortex, where neurons respond

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

to the difference, f2 – f1. This is challenging to study

because the decision variable does not evolve over a

long time scale. There is no need to acquire many sam-

ples of evidence. All that is needed is an estimate of f2 and the application of a threshold. The flutter-vibration task complements the motion decision task by demonstrating the diverse functions of persistent activity. In the motion task, the persistence supports the computation of the decision variable—the accumulated evidence bearing on the decision alternatives. In the flutter-vibration task, the persistent activity represents a sensory quality—the frequency of the reference stimulus—through a delay period.

Perceptual Decision-Making Is a Model for

Reasoning From Samples of Evidence

## Most of the decisions animals and humans make are not about weak or noisy sensory stimuli. They

are about activities, purchases, propositions, and

MIP LIP menu items. They are informed by knowledge and

Receptive eld

characteristics

Attention

sensitive,

preparation

Retina-centered,

preparation

Object-specic

viewing, grasping

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1404

19/01/21 9:33 AM

expectations derived from sources such as personal

experience, books, friends, and spreadsheets. Some are

based on internal (subjective) valuation or preference.

Many involve reasoning from sources of evidence that may differ in reliability and that must be weighed against costs and benefits. To what extent do the neural mechanisms of perceptual decision-making apply to these other types of decisions? Imagine the following scenario. As you leave your home in the morning, you realize that you will be outdoors from 4 to 5 pm and must decide whether to carry

an umbrella. To make this interesting, assume this occurred before the age of the internet and accurate satellite weather prediction. You must decide based on yesterday's forecast of "possible chance of rain", the clear appearance of the sky at 7:00 am, a small drop in the barometric pressure compared to 1 hour before, and the observation that among a dozen pedestrians visible from your window only one seems to be carrying an umbrella. Let us assume further that you have experience with such decisions and have some sense of how reliable these indicators are. Finally, the cumbersomeness of carrying the umbrella is such that your decision boils down to a reasoned assessment of whether rain is more likely than not. The right way to make this decision is to consider each of the indicators and ask how likely they would be if rain does or does not occur in the afternoon.

These likelihoods are learned estimates of conditional

Figure 56–7 (Opposite) Persistent neural activity maintains

working memory, attention, and plans of action.  The mon-

key is asked to view a scene and respond to a visual stimulus

(S) by either moving its eyes (E) or reaching (R) or grasping (G) with its hand. Each histogram represents the firing rate of a representative neuron as a function of time following presentation of the visual stimulus. The dashed circles show the response fields. This term is preferable to receptive and movement field because these neurons are neither purely sensory nor purely motor. The blue line shows where on the screen the monkey is asked to initially fixate its gaze. A. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) fire when a monkey is preparing to make an eye movement to an object or when the monkey directs attention to the object's location.

Most LIP neurons are not selective for object features such as shape and color. This neuron fires when the object is presented in the neuron's response field, which lies in the circled area to the right of where the monkey is looking (1). The neuron's firing is enhanced if the object is presented while the monkey's attention is directed to this location or if the monkey is asked to plan an eye movement to the location (2). The firing can persist for several seconds after the stimulus has been removed (2), thereby providing a potential mechanism for maintaining a short-term or working memory of its location. The neuron does

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1405

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


probabilities, the probability of observing the indicator

when it rains in the afternoon, and the probability of

the same observation when it does not rain. For exam

-

ple, suppose through experience you have learned that the forecast, chance of rain, implies a 1 in 4 chance of rain. Then, the conditional probabilities are 1 in 4 and 3 in 4 that it will or will not rain, respectively, given the weather report. The ratio of these two probabilities is termed the likelihood ratio (LR), which is 1 in 3 in this case. If the LR is greater than 1, it favors rain, and if the LR is less than 1, it favors no rain. There is an LR for each of the four indicators. If the product of the four LRs is greater than 1, then you should carry the umbrella. For reasons that will be clear in a moment, it is useful take logarithms of LRs, termed the log-likelihood ratio (logLR). This provides a more natural scale

for belief, and it allows us to replace multiplication with addition [recall that log(xy)=log(x)+log(y)]. To appreciate the scale, assume that the one passerby with an umbrella would be equally likely to carry the umbrella whether or not rain is a prospect. Both probabilities are 1 in 2. The LR is therefore 1, and the log(1)=0, which corresponds to the intuition that this observation is uninformative. LRs greater than 1 have positive logarithms, and LRs less than 1 have negative logarithms, consistent with the way they bear on the prediction of rain. Monkeys can be trained to perform a version of this weather prediction task. In the experiment depicted in

not fire if an object is presented outside the neuron's response

field (eg, to the left) (3) even if the monkey is asked to attend to

the location of the neuron's response field (4). An object must

appear there even if only briefly (2). B. In the medial intraparietal area (MIP), neurons fire when the monkey is preparing to reach for a visual target. This neuron starts firing shortly after the appearance of a target in the

response field of the neuron, in this case, a fixed angle to the right of where the monkey is looking, whether its gaze is on the left edge (2) or the center (3) of the screen, and it continues to fire as the monkey waits to reach. The neuron does not fire when the monkey reaches for a target at the center of its gaze (1) or when the monkey plans to shift its gaze to a target in the response field, without reaching (4). The physical direction of the reach is not a factor in the neuron's firing: It is the same in 1 and 2, and yet the neuron fires only in 2 . C. In the anterior intraparietal area (AIP), neurons fire when the monkey is looking at or preparing to grasp an object and are selective for objects of particular shapes. This neuron fires when

the monkey is viewing a ring (1) or making a memory-guided reach to it in the dark (2). It fires especially strongly when the monkey is grasping the ring under visual guidance (3). It does not fire during viewing or grasping of other objects (4).

19/01/21 9:33 AM
expectations derived from sources such as personal

experience, books, friends, and spreadsheets. Some are

based on internal (subjective) valuation or preference.

Many involve reasoning from sources of evidence that may differ in reliability and that must be weighed against costs and benefits. To what extent do the neural mechanisms of perceptual decision-making apply to these other types of decisions? Imagine the following scenario. As you leave your home in the morning, you realize that you will be outdoors from 4 to 5 pm and must decide whether to carry

an umbrella. To make this interesting, assume this occurred before the age of the internet and accurate satellite weather prediction. You must decide based on yesterday's forecast of "possible chance of rain", the clear appearance of the sky at 7:00 am, a small drop in the barometric pressure compared to 1 hour before, and the observation that among a dozen pedestrians visible from your window only one seems to be carrying an umbrella. Let us assume further that you have experience with such decisions and have some sense of how reliable these indicators are. Finally, the cumbersomeness of carrying the umbrella is such that your decision boils down to a reasoned assessment of whether rain is more likely than not. The right way to make this decision is to consider each of the indicators and ask how likely they would be if rain does or does not occur in the afternoon.

These likelihoods are learned estimates of conditional

Figure 56–7 (Opposite) Persistent neural activity maintains

working memory, attention, and plans of action.  The mon-

key is asked to view a scene and respond to a visual stimulus

(S) by either moving its eyes (E) or reaching (R) or grasping (G) with its hand. Each histogram represents the firing rate of a representative neuron as a function of time following presentation of the visual stimulus. The dashed circles show the response fields. This term is preferable to receptive and movement field because these neurons are neither purely sensory nor purely motor. The blue line shows where on the screen the monkey is asked to initially fixate its gaze. A. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) fire when a monkey is preparing to make an eye movement to an object or when the monkey directs attention to the object's location.

Most LIP neurons are not selective for object features such as shape and color. This neuron fires when the object is presented in the neuron's response field, which lies in the circled area to the right of where the monkey is looking (1). The neuron's firing is enhanced if the object is presented while the monkey's attention is directed to this location or if the monkey is asked to plan an eye movement to the location (2). The firing can persist for several seconds after the stimulus has been removed (2), thereby providing a potential mechanism for maintaining a short-term or working memory of its location. The neuron does

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1405

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


probabilities, the probability of observing the indicator

when it rains in the afternoon, and the probability of

the same observation when it does not rain. For exam

-

ple, suppose through experience you have learned that the forecast, chance of rain, implies a 1 in 4 chance of rain. Then, the conditional probabilities are 1 in 4 and 3 in 4 that it will or will not rain, respectively, given the weather report. The ratio of these two probabilities is termed the likelihood ratio (LR), which is 1 in 3 in this case. If the LR is greater than 1, it favors rain, and if the LR is less than 1, it favors no rain. There is an LR for each of the four indicators. If the product of the four LRs is greater than 1, then you should carry the umbrella. For reasons that will be clear in a moment, it is useful take logarithms of LRs, termed the log-likelihood ratio (logLR). This provides a more natural scale

for belief, and it allows us to replace multiplication with addition [recall that log(xy)=log(x)+log(y)]. To appreciate the scale, assume that the one passerby with an umbrella would be equally likely to carry the umbrella whether or not rain is a prospect. Both probabilities are 1 in 2. The LR is therefore 1, and the log(1)=0, which corresponds to the intuition that this observation is uninformative. LRs greater than 1 have positive logarithms, and LRs less than 1 have negative logarithms, consistent with the way they bear on the prediction of rain. Monkeys can be trained to perform a version of this weather prediction task. In the experiment depicted in

not fire if an object is presented outside the neuron's response

field (eg, to the left) (3) even if the monkey is asked to attend to

the location of the neuron's response field (4). An object must

appear there even if only briefly (2). B. In the medial intraparietal area (MIP), neurons fire when the monkey is preparing to reach for a visual target. This neuron starts firing shortly after the appearance of a target in the

response field of the neuron, in this case, a fixed angle to the right of where the monkey is looking, whether its gaze is on the left edge (2) or the center (3) of the screen, and it continues to fire as the monkey waits to reach. The neuron does not fire when the monkey reaches for a target at the center of its gaze (1) or when the monkey plans to shift its gaze to a target in the response field, without reaching (4). The physical direction of the reach is not a factor in the neuron's firing: It is the same in 1 and 2, and yet the neuron fires only in 2 . C. In the anterior intraparietal area (AIP), neurons fire when the monkey is looking at or preparing to grasp an object and are selective for objects of particular shapes. This neuron fires when

the monkey is viewing a ring (1) or making a memory-guided reach to it in the dark (2). It fires especially strongly when the monkey is grasping the ring under visual guidance (3). It does not fire during viewing or grasping of other objects (4).

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Figure 56–8 Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP)

represent the accumulation of noisy evidence.  These neural

<!-- image -->

recordings were obtained while a monkey performed the reac-

tion time version of the motion task. The traces are average firing rates from 55 neurons. The neurons were of the same type shown in Figure 56–7A. The traces show average responses to three motion strengths: strong (red), weak (purple), and zero (pure noise, gray). The solid traces are from trials in which the monkey chose the target in the neuron's response field (RF; right

Figure 56–9, a monkey had to decide whether to look choice). The dashed traces are from trials in which the mon key chose the target outside the neuron's response field (left choice). For the nonzero strengths, the direction of random dot motion was the direction the monkey chose (ie, only correct choices are shown). The responses in the plot on the left, which are aligned to the start of random dot motion, exhibit a Chose target in RF

Chose target outside

gradual buildup of activity, leading to rightward choices, and

a gradual decline in activity, leading to leftward choices. The

rate of this buildup and decline reflects the strength and direc-

making its decisions by combining evidence from each -tion of motion. The responses on the right are to the same dot motion but are now aligned to the moment the monkey makes its eye movement (saccade) to indicate its choice and reveal its reaction time. The responses reach a common level just before the monkey makes its choice, consistent with the idea that a threshold applied to the firing rate establishes the termination of these trials. The responses do not reach a common level before leftward choices because these decisions were terminated when a separate population of neurons, with the left choice target in their response fields, reached a threshold firing rate. (Adapted, with permission, from Roitman and Shadlen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Society for Neuroscience.)

at a red or a green target, only one of which would shape and by giving the more informative shapes more

lead to a reward. Before committing to red or green,

the monkey was shown four shapes. Each served as an indicator about the location of the reward. The monkey had learned to associate predictive value with a total of 10 shapes, half of which favored reward at red, the other half at green. The shapes also differed in the reliability with which they predicted the reward location. The monkey learned to rely on these shapes rationally,

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1406

leverage on the choices.

While the monkeys made their decisions, neural activity was recorded from the same parietal area studied in the motion task. As before, the neu -

rons responded in a way that revealed the formation of the decision for or against the choice target in their response field. When the red target was in the response field, the neuron assigned positive values

19/01/21 9:33 AM

LIP

A

Subject

chooses

green

<!-- image -->



<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

Strong

Figure 56–9 Evidence accumulation underlies probabilistic

<!-- image -->

reasoning from evidentiary symbols.

Evidence

supporting

green

D. The same types of parietal neurons studied in the percep-

tual decision-making task represent the running sum of evi-

A. A monkey was trained to make decisions based on a

sequence of four shapes, drawn randomly with replacement from a set of 10. The shapes were added to the display sequen-

tially every one-half second. B. Each shape provides a different amount of evidence that a reward is associated with a red or green choice target. Some, like the diamond and semicircle, are highly reliable predictors

- that a reward will occur if the choice is for green or red, respectively. Others are less reliable predictors. The degree of reliability is quantified by the likelihood ratio or its logarithm. A good decision-maker should base the decision on the product of the likelihood ratios or the sum of their logarithms (logLR). C. The monkey's decisions were guided by the probabilistic evidence from the four shapes. On trials in which the sum of the logLR from the four shapes strongly favored green, the monkey
- almost always chose green. When the sum was closer to 0, the monkey had to base its decision on weak evidence and chose less consistently. The pattern of choices demonstrates that the monkey assigned greater weight to the shapes that were more reliable (strong versus weak).

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1407

dence bearing on the choice target in its response field. The

- spikes are shown from a single decision when the green target was in the neuron's response field. The horizontal black line below the spikes marks the neutral level of evidence for green versus red, such that the two choice targets are equally likely to be rewarded. The vertical position of the green or red lines associated with each successive presentation of an indicated shape show the cumulative evidence conferred by the shapes that the reward was at the green target. The first shape was weak evidence for green. The second and third shapes supplied mounting evidence against green (for red). Note the reduction in firing rate. The final shape provided strong evidence for green, such that the cumulative evidence from all the shapes favored green. Note the increase in firing rate. It is an example of a single neuron in the association cortex using persistent activity to compute quantities useful for decision-making. Based on the firing rates from many trials, it was shown that neurons encode the cumulative sum of the logarithm of the probability ratios—the logLR that a reward is associated with the choice target in the neuron's response field. (Adapted, with permission, from Yang and Shadlen 2007.)

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness





Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

to the red-favoring shapes and negative values to the

green-favoring shapes. When the green target was in

the response field, the signs were reversed. As shown

in the example, the response changed discretely when each of the four shapes was presented, and it did so by an amount commensurate with the degree of reliability. In fact, the increment (or decrement) was proportional to the logLR assigned by the experimenter to the shape! The brain simply adds these logLRs to form a decision. And if the monkey is allowed to view as many shapes as it wants, it will typically stop when the accumulated evidence (in units of logLR) reaches a criterion level. The LIP neurons do the same thing they did in the motion decision. They produce firing rates that represent the cumulative sum of noisy increments and decrements. By adding in units of logLR, the brain achieves reasoning from probabilistic cues in the way a statistician or actuary combines evidence from multiple sources.

The experiment demonstrates that the mechanism used for perceptual decision-making is also at play in more complicated decisions that involve reasoning from more abstract sources of evidence. It speaks to the broader theme of this chapter: The study of decisionmaking offers insight into how the brain achieves a variety of cognitive functions. Decisions About Preference Use Evidence

About Value

## Many, if not most, decisions made by humans and animals are expressions of preference, based on an

assignment of value. In some instances, the value is

innate. For example, most animals experience sweet as positive and bitter as negative (Chapter 29). In the vast majority of instances, however, value is learned through experience, or it is derived from reasoning based on other preferences. Unlike a decision about the direction of motion, a medical diagnosis, or the weather, a decision about which of a pair of items one prefers is not objectively right or wrong. It can only be said to be consistent or inconsistent with one's expression of value. In fact, our knowledge of a subject's valuation of an object may only be revealed to us by observing her choices. Yet despite the qualitative difference between subjective and objective evidence, there are parallels between the neural mechanisms that support percep-

tual and value-based decisions. Decision-makers take more time to choose between items of similar value than items that differ substantially in value, and their choices are less consistent. In a typical experiment, the

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1408

participant is asked to indicate the value of each item

that they will later make choices about. For example,

they might be asked how much they are willing to pay

or they are asked to indicate a rating from highly undesirable through neutral to highly desirable. This procedure is typically repeated to provide a subjective value for each item to be used in the experiment. The participant is then asked to decide between pairs of items. The difference in the subjective values communicated before the experiment provides

an index of the difficulty of the decision between the items. It is analogous to motion coherence. A similar approach works with animals. For example, a monkey might demonstrate a preference for grape juice over apple juice, and then be asked to choose between a small volume of grape juice versus a large volume of apple juice. The decision is rendered more difficult by titrating the ratio of volumes to values that lead the monkey to choose either juice with equal tendency. Two types of neurons associated with this type of value encoding have been identified. The first, typically located in the striatum, encodes the value associated

with an action. The second, primarily in the orbitofrontal and cingulate cortex, appears to encode the value associated with specific items. Decisions about preference seem to arise from the same strategy that governs perceptual decisions. Just as a decision between left and right motion is guided by the difference in firing rates of left- and right-preferring sensory neurons, a decision between two items is based on the difference in activ -ity of neurons encoding the values of each item. These neural representations are noisy, and this feature might explain why a decision-maker may make choices that are inconsistent with their values. It might also explain why decisions between items of similar value tend to take more time—a speed–consistency trade-off similar to the speed–accuracy trade-off discussed above. The analogy to perceptual decision-making is appealing, but it misses the more interesting aspects of value-based decisions. As mentioned above, the value

of most items is not given by biology but instead is learned. Further, there is no reason to assume that such value is monovalent. One may value an item differently, based on different qualities and considerations, and one or more of those qualities may dominate under different circumstances. Accordingly, the value of an item could appear to change simply by the occasion of its comparison to another item, which might invite emphasis on a more or less desirable aspect. Novelty, familiarity, and the value of exploration itself might also play a role in modifying a subjective valuation. These considerations might contribute to the "noisy" representation of value that is thought to

19/01/21 9:33 AM

explain inconsistencies and long decision times in

preference choices. This type of noise belies processes

that are far more complex than variability in random

dot displays and the noisy spike rates of neurons. Such evaluative processes are likely to involve prospection and memory retrieval, which are only beginning to be understood at the neural level (Chapter 52). In the end, these processes must furnish samples of evidence bearing on the relative value of the items, and this evidence is either accumulated or evaluated individually against a criterion to halt the process with a decision. Decision-Making Offers a Framework for Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


area (Figure 56–7C), the association area might convey

knowledge about curvature, distance, convexity, and

texture. One might be inclined to use terms borrowed

from geometry to catalogue such knowledge, but it may be simpler to think about the repertory of hand shapes available to the organism. Importantly, the neurons in association cortex do not command an immedi -ate action. They represent the possibility of acting in a certain way—an intention or provisional affordance (Box 56–1). Let us defer for the moment the aspect of the knowledge state that includes conscious awareness and consider the simpler sense of knowledge as a state

Understanding Thought Processes, States of

Knowing, and States of Awareness

## States of knowledge have persistence. Even if they concern information derived from the senses, the knowl

edge of sensation generally outlasts the sensory activity

itself. In this way, the state of knowledge resembles a perceptual decision—a commitment to a proposition about the object, based on sensory evidence. As we have seen, these states are often tied to possible behaviors rather than to the features of the sensory information. This is a position argued by many philosophers and the psychologist James J. Gibson. This simple point can be made on empirical grounds. Persistent neural activity is not present in sensory areas of the brain unless a stimulus is unchanging and then

only if the neurons do not adapt. Naturally, sensory neurons must change their response when the environment changes or the observer moves in the environment, whereas knowledge states persist through sensory changes and without a continuous stream of input. Indeed, persistent activity is apparent in areas of the brain that associate sources of information—from the senses and from memory—with circuits that organize behavior. In the prefrontal cortex, persistent states represent plans of action, abstract rules, and strategies. In the parietal and temporal lobes, neural representa-

-of possible utilization. Such preconscious ideation is probably the dominant state in which an animal interacts with the environment. It is arguably also the lion's share of human experience, although because we are not conscious of it, we underestimate its dominance. Two important insights emerge from this perspective. The first is that the correspondence between knowledge and neuronal activity lies at a level of brain organization between sensation and behavior. Although the flow of information from sensory epithelia (eg, the retina) through the primary cortical sensory areas is essential for perception, knowledge resulting from activity in higher brain regions has temporal flexibility and persistence not seen in lower brain regions—what the philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty termed the temporal thickness of the present . The second insight is that the computation leading to a knowledge state has the structure of a decision—a provisional commitment to something approximating

tions have the dual character of knowledge and the behavior that knowledge bears upon, such as making an eye movement or reaching, eating, or avoiding. The responses can resemble a spatial representation, as they do in area LIP, if the target of the projection is the eye movement system, but that is only because there is correspondence between space and action. A useful guide is to consider the source and target of the association. If the source is the visual cortex and the targets are premotor areas that control hand posture (eg, grip), as they do in the anterior intraparietal

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1409

a possible selection from a submenu of the behavioral repertory. We might say that the parietal association neurons interrogate the sensory areas for evidence bearing on the possibility of a behavior: look there, reach there, posture the hand this way to grasp. Of course, neurons do not ask questions. Nevertheless, we can think of the circuits as if they scan the world looking for evidence bearing on a possible behavior. The type of information they can access is limited by functional and anatomical connectivity. The type of question is framed by the target of the projection, such as regions that control gaze, reaching, and grasping. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle endowed Sherlock Holmes with the insight that the key to discovery was knowing where to look and what to look for. We acquire

knowledge by controlling the brain's interrogation system. Some interrogations are automatic, whereas others are learned. An example of the former is a sudden change of brightness of an object in the visual field; it provides evidence bearing on the possibility of orienting the eyes or body toward it. An example

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Box 56–1 Affordances, Perception, and Knowledge

## James J. Gibson, known for his ecological theory of perception, referred to affordances as properties of objects

and the environment. The term comes from the verb

afford. An object affords possible behaviors, such as lifting, grabbing, filling, hiding in, drawing/writing upon (eg, parchment) or with (eg, a brush), or walking upon. The affordance refers to the potential behaviors of the animal. The same object, say a stone, could afford grasping, dropping, breaking (ie, used as a tool), throwing (as a missile weapon), or pinning (as a paperweight). Gibson was widely criticized for claiming that perceptual processes picked up these affordances directly from the optical array, what he termed "direct percep-

tion." The term is commonly misunderstood as antithetical to computational accounts of information processing. By "direct perception," Gibson did not mean that there were no computations on the data received through the senses. He promoted the mathematical understanding of these operations. He meant that we do not perceive the intermediates.

of the latter draws on learning and foraging; we learn,

through play and social interaction (eg, school), how

to look for hidden items and how to explore in a goal-

directed way. The beautiful thing about this construction is that an answer to the question confers a kind of meaning. Even for such a mundane question like "Might I look

there?," an affirmative answer—a decision to (possibly) look at an as yet undefined object in the periphery of one's visual field—confers a spatial knowledge about the item. Before we have looked directly at it to identify what it is, we know about its thereness. From the perspective of decision-making, the location of an object is not perceived because there is a neural activity in a map of the visual field. Rather, the location is perceived because some aspect of the visual field—a fleck of contrast, change in brightness, appearance or disappearance—answered the question above in the affirmative. This way of thinking helps us understand the disease states known by the term agnosia, from the Greek word meaning "absence of knowledge." The classic

example is visual hemineglect, which is caused by damage to the parietal lobe (Chapter 59). A patient with a right parietal lesion will ignore the left side of the visual field and also the left side of objects even when the entire object is in the right visual field (Figure 56–10; see

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1410

We do perceive the parts of objects that are acciden-

tally occluded by something in our line of sight, and we

perceive the back of an opaque object that is occluded

by its front. We do not perceive the outlines, the line art, and many other details, but that is not to say that they do not register on the retina and the visual cortex. Gibson held that representation of visual information is not a sufficient condition for perception. From the perspective of the neuroscience of decision-making, one might place emphasis on the representation of potential behavior— something like a provisional commitment to a plan. Affordance still refers to a category of actions, but it is about the organization of the action (eg, throwing) or strategy, and also—but not necessarily—a quality of the

object. The modifier, "provisional," emphasizes that the action may not actually ensue now or ever. This modifier would have been superfluous in Gibson's use of the term affordance, because an affordance was a property of the object (in his ecological framework) and therefore had a permanence independent of the perceiver.

also Figure 59–1). Unlike the left side blindness, called

homonymous hemianopsia (or hemiblind), which

accompanies damage to the right visual cortex (homon-

ymous because it is the same regardless of which eye is used), the patient with a parietal lesion does not complain of an inability to see. She is unaware of the deficit, so much so that crossing a street is a major hazard. A hemiblind patient with damage to the right visual cortex still expects to interrogate and receive information from the left visual field. When that patient

receives no visual information, he knows to turn to face parallel to the street, thereby placing its contents in the intact right hemifield. In contrast, the patient with hemineglect does not interrogate the left hemifield in the first place. She does not perceive a lack of visual information because the apparatus to conduct the interrogation is not working. Like most deficits, there is enough redundancy in the brain (or the damage partial) that some visual capacities are present. In fact, when confronted with a single spot of light on a dark background, the same patient may report its presence accurately even in the affected hemifield. There are other versions of hemineglect that involve an absence of knowledge of the body. For example, a patient with a right parietal injury may

deny that her left arm is hers. She may recognize it as

19/01/21 9:33 AM

Right posterior

parietal cortex

<!-- image -->

the right parietal lobe, many patients are unaware of the left

side of space or the left part of objects. The drawings on the right were made by patients with unilateral visual neglect following lesion of the right posterior parietal cortex. Agnosias can also be induced in healthy individuals by diverting attention (see Figure 25–8). (Reproduced, with permission, from Bloom F, Lazerson A. 1988. Brain, Mind and Behavior, 2nd ed., p. 300. New York: Freeman.) an arm but deny that it is hers. When asked whose arm

it is, she may express ignorance bordering on disin-

terest (personal experience). The syndrome is usually

associated with some visual neglect as well and some weakness on the same side of the body suggestive of a more rostral and superior localization. Consider that the body's position is known to us partly through the somatosensory system, partly through the predicted

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1411

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


consequences of our motor command, and partly

through vision. The arm in particular is a common fea-

ture of our lower visual field. Indeed, we are accus

-

tomed to ignoring it. These examples are the most common of the agnosias (which are thankfully rare). Other well-known examples involve problems in face recognition (pros-

-

opagnosia) and the perception of color (achromatopsia), both associated with lesions of the temporal lobe. The different types of agnosia have loose correspondence to the anatomical specializations we learned about in Chapter 24. In particular, the ventral extension of the central visual pathways into the temporal lobe is referred to as the "what" pathway, which contains circuits that are specialized for processing faces, objects, color, and semantic memory. The dorsal extension, which has been termed the "where" or "how" pathway, seems concerned with representations supporting localization. An alternative formulation would characterize these streams in terms of associations with behavio rally relevant targets. For the dorsal stream, those are

parietal areas with projections to motor systems that reach, look, or grasp. For the ventral stream, those are temporal lobe areas with projections to structures that guide foraging decisions to eat, avoid, hide, approach, mate, and communicate. The last few behaviors are social affordances conferred by color and facial identity/ expression. With a small stretch of imagination, the organization of social affordances links to other functions of the temporal lobe (and temporal parietal junction) in humans. For example, these regions are associated with language comprehension and inference about what someone else is thinking. The former is associated with a devastating agnosia, known as Wernicke aphasia (Chapters 1 and 55); the latter is known as theory of mind and will be discussed below. From the perspective of decision-making, perceiving, believing, and thinking have the character of a provisional commitment to a proposition. Brain states

that correspond to a sense of knowing, be it perceiving or believing, share two important aspects with decision-making: an extended temporal profile that withstands changes in the sensory and motor streams (ie, a freedom from immediacy) and a propositional character captured by the term "affordance." Knowing is not solely about the information but is like the outcome of a decision to embrace a proposition: Might I do something, enact something, approach someone, or retain the possibility of trying the option I am not choosing now? Two caveats deserve mention. This frame -work does not replace a computational account of

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

information processing, nor does it explain the neu-

ral mechanisms that support these computations. It

mainly tells us about the level of brain organization that

carries out these operations. For example, consider the search for the neurons that achieve knowledge about the color red, despite changes in the spectral content of the morning and evening light—a phenomenon known as color constancy. Instead of searching in sensory areas for neurons that respond selectively to red in this invariant way, one might look for neurons that guide the choice of ripe fruit. This does not obviate the computations required to recover the surface reflectance properties of the fruit's skin, despite variation in the spectral content of the illuminating light. The raw data for such computations are supplied by sensory neurons that lack color constancy and maintain temporal fidelity with changes in the environment. The knowledge state "red," however, is invariant to the illuminant and likely persistent. In animals that lack language, the knowledge state may not be dissociable from "ripe vegetation." The second caveat is that we have not distin guished knowledge states that we are consciously aware of from those that we experience unconsciously.

It is difficult to study nonconscious processing

because people deny experience of the process. Indeed,

the term nonconscious experience seems like an oxy-

moron. The experimenter must find a way to prove that information processing has occurred despite the fact that the subject is unaware of it. In recent years, it has become possible to establish conditions whereby information is provided to a human subject that has a high likelihood of going unnoticed but is nonetheless able to influence behavior, thereby permitting scientific characterization of nonconscious mental processing (Chapter 59). This has encouraged neuroscientists to ask what it is about the neural activity that gives rise to the thoughts, perceptions, and movements that do reach conscious awareness. We will not review this vast topic here but instead share a pertinent insight: Viewed through the lens of decision-making, the problem of consciousness may be simpler than imagined. Broadly speaking, two sets of phenomena fall under the heading consciousness. The first concerns levels of arousal. One is not conscious when one is asleep, under

-general anesthesia, comatose, or having a generalized seizure. One is fully conscious when awake, and there are levels of consciousness between these extremes. These states are associated with terms such as confu -sion, dissociation, stupor, and obtundation. Some alterations of consciousness are normal (eg, sleep), whereas others are induced by toxins (eg, alcohol), metabolic disturbances (eg, hypoglycemia), low oxygen, trauma (eg, concussion), or fever (eg, delirium). The neuroscience underlying these states—and the transitions between them—is immensely important to medicine. We might classify this group of phenomena

as neurology-consciousness. However, these topics are not what most people mean when they speak of the mystery of consciousness. This is partly because they are less mysterious but also because their characterization is more objective and the phenomena can be studied in animals. That said, there is much to be learned about the mechanisms responsible for sleep, awakening, anesthesia, and so forth. Much of the neuroscience is unfolding at a rapid pace (Chapter 44). We will not say more about neurology-consciousness here, except to seed one useful insight. Imagine a mother and father sleeping comfortably in their bed-

room as a storm ensues outdoors. There are also traf -fic sounds and even the occasional thunder. This scene goes on for some time, until the cry of a baby awakens the parents. This common occurrence tells us that the nonconscious brain is capable of processing sounds and deciding to become conscious. It decides, nonconsciously, that some sounds afford an opportunity for more sleep while others sound a call to nurture. This

19/01/21 9:33 AM

For example, as I make my way through the forest trying to find the creek that I hear burbling, my brain might consider locations of objects I pass that are graspable, attached to vegetation, and with color suggesting ripeness. I may be unaware of this consciously. Yet that evening in my search for food, I may return to this part of the forest, guided by these unconscious encounters. I may do this without knowing why, or the memory might pierce consciousness. All that has been said up to now could apply to conscious and nonconscious experience. We are now prepared to elucidate the difference. Consciousness Can be Understood Through the

Lens of Decision Making

## Clearly, we are unaware of most of the operations that transpire in our brains, and this is true even for

the processes that ultimately pierce consciousness.

This is why Freud famously quipped that consciousness is overrated. Every thought that enters our awareness began as neural computation preceding the conscious awareness of that thought. Indeed, the sophistication of nonconscious mental processes, including those leading to "I've got it!" moments and the activities we perform while occupied by a phone call, involves decisions that transpire without conscious awareness.

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1412

decision is similar to the perceptual decisions consid-

ered earlier in this chapter. Both involve nonconscious

processing of evidence. However, the commitment to

awaken and parent is a decision to engage the environment consciously. This may be a touchstone between neurology-consciousness and the more intriguing consciousness that you are experiencing as you read these words (or so the authors hope). When neuroscientists, psychologists, and philosophers ponder the mysteries of consciousness, they are referring to loftier themes than wakefulness. This loftier

set of phenomena comprises awareness, imagery, volition, and agency. There is a subjective component to all conscious experience. The experience of conscious perception incorporates a sense that it is me that is beholding the content. It parallels the "me" in volition. It is not that my arm moved on its own; I made it move! We used the term deliberation earlier in this chapter to describe the thought process leading to a decision. Our use of the term was metaphorical. It describes a computation and a biological mechanism, but it does not require awareness. Actual deliberation implies conscious intention. We are aware of the steps of reasoning along the way. We could report, were we asked, about the evidence we relied upon—that is, the evidence we were consciously aware of during the decision and possibly some of the evidence we used nonconsciously were it accessible from memory to include in our report. Could the difference between conscious awareness of an item and nonconscious processing of that item be a mere matter of whether the brain has decided on the possibility of reporting? Could it be this simple? Consider the following scenario. A psychologist concludes that a study participant has seen something nonconsciously because the item affected a subsequent Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


not commit to a provisional report. The evidence did

not satisfy a decision criterion like the termination

bounds in the perceptual decision-making task consid-

ered earlier in the chapter. This account provides a plausible explanation of the failure of the participant to report that she saw the item, but the mere entertaining of the possibility of

reporting does not seem to explain the phenomenology of the perceptual experience itself, at least not at first glance. This explanation demands more careful consideration of the character of the report. Just as we attach states of spatial knowledge to configurations of the hand for reaching and grasping, we must consider the knowledge state that accompanies the affordance of reporting. Whether by language or gesture (eg, pointing), the report is a provisional communication with another agent or oneself (eg, in the future). It presumes knowledge about the mind of the receiver. Cognitive scientists use the term theory of mind to refer to this type of knowledge or mental capacity. It can be demonstrated by asking someone to reason about

-the motivation behind another agent's actions, and it can be studied in animals and preverbal children by examining their reactions to another child or puppet. In one study protocol, two children witness a desired toy placed in a left or right container (Figure 62–2). The test child then witnesses the toy's displacement to the other container while the other child is absent. When that child returns, the experimenter assesses the test child's expectation of which container the returning child will open to find the toy. Children under 3 years old do not exhibit theory of mind by this assay. They think the returning child will open the container that contains the toy, not the one it was in before the transfer. Whether animals other than humans have theory of mind is controversial. We suspect there are inchoate forms of this capacity in the animal kingdom and in children under 3. When adults perform tasks that depend on theory of mind, the right temporal-parietal junction and superior temporal sulcus are active. Theory of mind—in concert with narrative—has profound consequences for the knowledge state associated with the reporting affordance. Imagine a woman

behavior and the participant denies having seen it. Suppose the subsequent behavior involved reaching in the direction of the object. Based on what we know about decision-making, we would conclude that brain circuits like the ones discussed earlier received sufficient evi dence to commit to the possibility of looking, reaching, and approaching, but there was insufficient evidence to commit to the possibility of reporting. Just as the brain entertains the possibility of looking, reaching, or grasping, it may also entertain the possibility of reporting. That is, reporting is also a provisional affordance . Events afford the possibility of reporting, and this includes the nonconscious states of knowledge acquired through decision-making. Indeed, the event

of having decided may be experienced consciously— the aha moment—by virtue of another decision to report. In the study scenario, the participant was not consciously aware of the item because her brain did

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1413

looking at a power drill resting on a table. She experiences the location of the drill, relative to her eyes and hand, as well as its texture and shape. It has a graspable surface that is partly in her line of sight and partly occluded (eg, the back). These are the knowledge states that arise through provisional commitments to look at, reach for, and grasp the drill. They are likely to involve neural activity similar to what is illustrated in Figure 56–7, and they are the outcome of simple decisions. The drill brings to mind other affordances

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

associated with its utility as a tool, its potential to make

noise, and the potential danger posed by the sharp bit

at one end. This is an elaborate, potentially rich col-

lection of knowledge, but it could all be experienced nonconsciously. For example, if the woman were preoccupied with some other task, such as a phone conversation with her friend, she might nonetheless make use of these knowledge states. But suppose there is a man on the other side of the table and suppose the woman—her brain, that is—has also reached a provisional commitment to report to the

man about the drill between them. Consider the change to her knowledge state. The drill now has a presence not only in her visual field, relative to her gaze, her hand, and her repertory of actions, but also in the man's field of vision and his possible actions. The parts of the drill that are not in plain sight to her are known to be in the line of sight of the man. Indeed, her capacity for "theory of mind" also supplies knowledge that other parts of the drill are seen only by her and that the man could be experiencing those parts just as she experiences the parts that are not in her direct line of sight— that is, both preconsciously as occluded parts of the object and consciously as part of an object that could be seen directly from another vantage point. There is something about the drill that is at once private, public, and in the world—independent of either mind. The drill is there for the next person who enters the room, or an imagined person. The transformation of knowledge of the drill is from a collection of first-person experiences (eg, qualities and affordances) to a thing in the world that possesses an existence unto itself. It is conceivable that this state of knowledge is our conscious awareness of the world, or at least a part of it, for the knowledge state associated with a decision to report is further enriched by content of the report itself. The report might be simple, like pointing to the location of a tool or a hiding spot, or it might involve narrative. In the case of the hiding spot, additional con-

tent might be conveyed to indicate that the enclosure affords safety from a predator or, alternatively, a predator's location. Many simple reports do not require narrative because items such as tools and enclosures persist and theory of mind presumes the affordance of a tool or a hiding place in another's mind, whereas events, which also afford the possibility of reporting, often require narrative because they are transient. The knowledge state associated with narrative can incorporate history, simulation, prediction, etiology (eg, origin stories), purpose, and consequence. For the

drill, narrative might enhance the knowledge state to include memory of the place of purchase, an episode in which it malfunctioned, and the mechanism of its

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1414

detachable bit. Narrative allows us to reason in more

complex environments than the scenarios considered

earlier (eg, the umbrella example and the probabilistic

reasoning task; Figure 56–9). We could not reason about science, medical diagnosis, and jurisprudence without origin stories, simulation, hypotheses, prospection, and counterfactuals. The evolutionary advantage of this capacity is obvious (at least for the time being, until it leads us to make the earth uninhabitable). To summarize, the conscious awareness of an item might arise when the nonconscious brain reaches a decision to report the item to another mind. The inten-

tion is provisional in that no overt report—verbal or gesture—need occur, just as no eye movement need ensue for the parietal cortex to engage the possible intention of foveating. Just as the provisional intention to foveate corresponds to preconscious knowledge of the location of an as yet unidentified object in the periphery, the possibility of reporting to another agent (or self), about whom we have theory of mind, corresponds to the knowledge of an item in a way that satisfies most aspects of conscious awareness. Naturally, our journey from perceptual decisionmaking through affordances to consciousness is at best incomplete. For example, it does not yet provide

a satisfying account of what a conscious experience feels like. But it is a start, as it supplies a coarse explanation of why sensory information acquired through the eyes is experienced differently from auditory or somatosensory experiences, and it provides insight into the private aspects of perceptual awareness as well as our experience of objects as things in the world, independent of what they afford to the perceiver. These last features follow from the considera -tion of another agent's mind. The view of consciousness from the perspective of decision-making is, if nothing else, simplifying. There is no reason to search for a special area of the brain

that bestows consciousness, or a special neuron type, or a special ingredient in the representation of information (eg, an oscillation or synchronization), or a special mechanism. The mechanism might look like any other kind of provisional commitment—that is, a decision that confers a state of knowing but does not entail conscious awareness. Of course, brain activity itself is not conscious, just as the brain activity supporting a possible hand posture is not the hand posture itself. In this sense, the mechanism of consciousness is only different from other affordances because it involves reporting instead of reaching, looking toward, eating, drinking, hiding from, walking through, and mating. All are likely to involve decision formation and threshold detection.

19/01/21 9:33 AM
Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

associated with its utility as a tool, its potential to make

noise, and the potential danger posed by the sharp bit

at one end. This is an elaborate, potentially rich col-

lection of knowledge, but it could all be experienced nonconsciously. For example, if the woman were preoccupied with some other task, such as a phone conversation with her friend, she might nonetheless make use of these knowledge states. But suppose there is a man on the other side of the table and suppose the woman—her brain, that is—has also reached a provisional commitment to report to the

man about the drill between them. Consider the change to her knowledge state. The drill now has a presence not only in her visual field, relative to her gaze, her hand, and her repertory of actions, but also in the man's field of vision and his possible actions. The parts of the drill that are not in plain sight to her are known to be in the line of sight of the man. Indeed, her capacity for "theory of mind" also supplies knowledge that other parts of the drill are seen only by her and that the man could be experiencing those parts just as she experiences the parts that are not in her direct line of sight— that is, both preconsciously as occluded parts of the object and consciously as part of an object that could be seen directly from another vantage point. There is something about the drill that is at once private, public, and in the world—independent of either mind. The drill is there for the next person who enters the room, or an imagined person. The transformation of knowledge of the drill is from a collection of first-person experiences (eg, qualities and affordances) to a thing in the world that possesses an existence unto itself. It is conceivable that this state of knowledge is our conscious awareness of the world, or at least a part of it, for the knowledge state associated with a decision to report is further enriched by content of the report itself. The report might be simple, like pointing to the location of a tool or a hiding spot, or it might involve narrative. In the case of the hiding spot, additional con-

tent might be conveyed to indicate that the enclosure affords safety from a predator or, alternatively, a predator's location. Many simple reports do not require narrative because items such as tools and enclosures persist and theory of mind presumes the affordance of a tool or a hiding place in another's mind, whereas events, which also afford the possibility of reporting, often require narrative because they are transient. The knowledge state associated with narrative can incorporate history, simulation, prediction, etiology (eg, origin stories), purpose, and consequence. For the

drill, narrative might enhance the knowledge state to include memory of the place of purchase, an episode in which it malfunctioned, and the mechanism of its

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1414

detachable bit. Narrative allows us to reason in more

complex environments than the scenarios considered

earlier (eg, the umbrella example and the probabilistic

reasoning task; Figure 56–9). We could not reason about science, medical diagnosis, and jurisprudence without origin stories, simulation, hypotheses, prospection, and counterfactuals. The evolutionary advantage of this capacity is obvious (at least for the time being, until it leads us to make the earth uninhabitable). To summarize, the conscious awareness of an item might arise when the nonconscious brain reaches a decision to report the item to another mind. The inten-

tion is provisional in that no overt report—verbal or gesture—need occur, just as no eye movement need ensue for the parietal cortex to engage the possible intention of foveating. Just as the provisional intention to foveate corresponds to preconscious knowledge of the location of an as yet unidentified object in the periphery, the possibility of reporting to another agent (or self), about whom we have theory of mind, corresponds to the knowledge of an item in a way that satisfies most aspects of conscious awareness. Naturally, our journey from perceptual decisionmaking through affordances to consciousness is at best incomplete. For example, it does not yet provide

a satisfying account of what a conscious experience feels like. But it is a start, as it supplies a coarse explanation of why sensory information acquired through the eyes is experienced differently from auditory or somatosensory experiences, and it provides insight into the private aspects of perceptual awareness as well as our experience of objects as things in the world, independent of what they afford to the perceiver. These last features follow from the considera -tion of another agent's mind. The view of consciousness from the perspective of decision-making is, if nothing else, simplifying. There is no reason to search for a special area of the brain

that bestows consciousness, or a special neuron type, or a special ingredient in the representation of information (eg, an oscillation or synchronization), or a special mechanism. The mechanism might look like any other kind of provisional commitment—that is, a decision that confers a state of knowing but does not entail conscious awareness. Of course, brain activity itself is not conscious, just as the brain activity supporting a possible hand posture is not the hand posture itself. In this sense, the mechanism of consciousness is only different from other affordances because it involves reporting instead of reaching, looking toward, eating, drinking, hiding from, walking through, and mating. All are likely to involve decision formation and threshold detection.

19/01/21 9:33 AM

Thus, by studying the neuroscience of decision-

making, we are also studying the neuroscience of

consciousness. There is still much to be learned about

the mechanisms of the simplest decisions described in the first part of the chapter. For example, we do not know what sets the bounds and how thresholds are implemented in brain circuits. Nevertheless, answers to these and other fundamental questions are in the crosshairs of modern neuroscience, and therefore, so is human consciousness. Highlights

1.

A decision is a commitment to a proposition,

action, or plan—among options—based on evi-

dence, prior knowledge, and expected outcomes.

- The commitment does not necessitate immediate action or any behavior, and it may be modified. 2. Decision-making provides a window on the neuroscience of cognition. It models contingent behavior and mental operations that are free
- from the immediate demands of sensory processing and control of the body's musculature. 3. A decision is formed by applying a rule to the state of evidence bearing on the alternatives. A simple decision rule for choosing between two
- alternatives employs a criterion. If the evidence exceeds the criterion, then choose the alternative supported by the evidence; if not, choose the other alternative. 4. For certain perceptual decisions, the source of evidence and its neural representation are known. 5. The accuracy of many decisions is limited by
- considerations of the signal strength and its associated noise. For neural systems, this noise
- is attributed to the variable discharge of single neurons, hence the variable firing rate of small populations of neurons that represent the evidence. 6. Many decisions benefit from multiple samples of evidence, which are combined across time. Such decision processes take time and require neural
- representations that can hold and update the accumulated evidence (ie, the decision variable). Neurons in the prefrontal and parietal cortex, which are capable of holding and updating their firing rates, represent the evolving decision variable. These neurons are also involved in planning, attention, and working memory. 7. The speed–accuracy trade-off is controlled by setting a bound or threshold on the amount of evidence required to terminate a decision. It is

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1415

Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness


an example of a policy that makes one decision-

maker different from another.

Many decisions are about propositions, items, or

8.

- goals that differ in value to the organism. Such value-based decisions depend on stored associa-
- tions between items and valence. 9. The source of evidence for many decisions is memory and active interrogation of the environment— information seeking. These operations come into
- play when animals forage and explore, and when a jazz musician improvises . 10. Decision-making invites us to consider knowledge not as an emergent property of neural representations but the result of directed, mostly
- nonconscious interrogation of evidence bearing on propositions, plans, and affordances. The intention is provisional in that no overt action need ensue. Just as the provisional intention to foveate corresponds to preconscious knowledge of the location of an as yet unidentified object in the periphery, the possibility of reporting to another agent (or self), about whom we have theory of mind, corresponds to the knowledge of an item in the ways we are aware of it consciously. 11. Viewed through the lens of decision-making, conscious awareness of an item might arise when the nonconscious brain reaches a decision to report to
- another mind. The affordance has the quality of narrative, much like silent speech or the idea preceding its expression in language. It also imbues objects with a presence in the environment inhabited by other minds, hence independent of the mind of the perceiver. It confers private and public content to aspects of the object as perceived.

Michael N. Shadlen

Eric R. Kandel

Selected Reading

Clark A. 1997. Being There: Putting brain, body, and world

together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 269 pp.

Dehaene S. 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How

the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. New York: Viking. Dennett D. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little,

Brown. Donlea JM, Pimentel D, Talbot CB, et al. 2018. Recurrent circuitry

for balancing sleep need and sleep. Neuron 97:378–389.e4.

19/01/21 9:33 AM


Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition

Gibson JJ. 2015. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.

Classic Edition. New York: Psychology Press.

Graziano MSA, Kastner S. 2011. Human consciousness and

- its relationship to social neuroscience: a novel hypothesis. Cogn Neurosci 2:98–113.
- Green DM, Swets JA. 1966. Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Kang YHR, Petzschner FH, Wolpert DM, Shadlen MN. 2017.
- Piercing of consciousness as a threshold-crossing operation. Curr Biol 27:2285–2295.
- Laming DRJ. 1968. Information Theory of Choice-Reaction Times. New York: Academic Press. Link SW. 1992. The Wave Theory of Difference and Similarity

working memory in macaque prefrontal cortex. Cereb

Cortex 13:1196–1207.

Constantinidis C, Funahashi S, Lee D, et al. 2018. Persistent

- Spiking Activity Underlies Working Memory. J Neurosci 38:7020–7028.
- Ditterich J, Mazurek M, Shadlen MN. 2003. Microstimulation of visual cortex affects the speed of perceptual decisions. Nat Neurosci 6:891–898.
- Fetsch CR, Odean NN, Jeurissen D, El-Shamayleh Y, Horwitz GD, Shadlen MN. 2018. Focal optogenetic suppression in macaque area MT biases direction discrimination and
- Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Luce RD. 1986. Response Times: Their Role in Inferring Elementary
- . decision confidence, but only transiently. Elife 7:e36523. Funahashi S, Bruce C, Goldman-Rakic P. 1989. Mnemonic coding of visual space in the monkey's dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol 61:331–349.
- Mental Organization. New York: Oxford University Press. Markkula G. 2015. Answering questions about conscious-
- ness by modeling perception as covert behavior. Front Psychol 6:803.
- Gnadt JW, Andersen RA. 1988. Memory related motor planning activity in posterior parietal cortex of monkey. Exp Brain Res 70:216–220.
- Merleau-Ponty M. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul Ltd. Rangel A, Camerer C, Montague PR. 2008. A framework for
- studying the neurobiology of value-based decision-making. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:545–556.
- Saxe R, Baron-Cohen S. 2006. The neuroscience of theory of mind. Soc Neurosci 1:i–ix. Shadlen MN, Newsome WT. 1994. Noise, neural codes and
- cortical organization. Curr Opin Neurobiol 4:569–579. Vickers D. 1979. Decision Processes in Visual Perception. London:
- Academic Press. Wimmer H, Perner J. 1983. Beliefs about beliefs: representation
- and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding of deception. Cognition 13:103–128.
- References Albright TD, Desimone R, Gross CG. 1984. Columnar organi-

zation of directionally selective cells in visual area MT of

macaques. J Neurophysiol 51:16–31.

- Andersen RA, Gnadt JW. 1989. Posterior parietal cortex. Rev Oculomot Res 3:315–335. Born RT, Bradley DC. 2005. Structure and function of visual
- area MT. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:157–189. Brincat SL, Siegel M, von Nicolai C, Miller EK. 2018. Gradual
- progression from sensory to task-related processing in cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:E7202-E7211.
- Britten KH, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT, Movshon JA. 1992. The analysis of visual motion: a comparison of neuronal and psychophysical performance. J. Neurosci. 12: 4745–65.
- Brody CD, Hernandez A, Zainos A, Romo R. 2003. Timing and neural encoding of somatosensory parametric

Kandel-Ch56\_1392-1416.indd 1416

- Gold JI, Shadlen MN. 2007. The neural basis of decision making. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:535–574. Kiani R, Hanks TD, Shadlen MN. 2008. Bounded integration
- in parietal cortex underlies decisions even when viewing duration is dictated by the environment. J Neurosci
- 28:3017–3029. Kiani R, Shadlen MN. 2009. Representation of confidence associated with a decision by neurons in the parietal cortex. Science 324:759–764.
- Mazurek ME, Roitman JD, Ditterich J, Shadlen MN. 2003. A role for neural integrators in perceptual decision making. Cereb Cortex 13:1257–1269.
- Mountcastle VB, Steinmetz MA, Romo R. 1990. Frequency discrimination in the sense of flutter: psychophysical measurements correlated with postcentral events in
- behaving monkeys. J Neurosci 10:3032–3044. Padoa-Schioppa C. 2011. Neurobiology of economic choice: a good-based model. Ann Rev Neurosci 34:333–359. Padoa-Schioppa C, Assad JA. 2006. Neurons in the orbito-
- frontal cortex encode economic value. Nature 441:223–226. Roitman JD, Shadlen MN. 2002. Response of neurons in the
- lateral intraparietal area during a combined visual discrimination reaction time task. J Neurosci 22:9475–9489.
- Romo R, Salinas E. 2001. Touch and go: decision-making mechanisms in somatosensation. Annu Rev Neurosci 24:107–137.
- Salzman CD, Britten KH, Newsome WT. 1990. Cortical microstimulation influences perceptual judgements of motion direction. Nature 346:174–177.
- Snyder LH, Batista AP, Andersen RA. 1997. Coding of intention in the posterior parietal cortex. Nature 386:167–170. Yang T, Shadlen MN. 2007. Probabilistic reasoning by neu-
- rons. Nature 447:1075–1080.

19/01/21 9:33 AM

Part IX

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1417

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1418

Preceding Page

Bedroom at Arles by Vincent Van Gogh. Van Gogh wrote to his friend and fellow painter,

Gaugin, that he had felt "my vision was strangely tired. Well, I rested for two and a

half days, and then I got back to work. But not yet daring to go outside, I did . . . a no.

30 canvas of my bedroom with the whitewood furniture that you know. Ah, well, it amused me enormously doing this bare interior. With a simplicity à la Seurat. In flat tints, but coarsely brushed in full impasto, the walls pale lilac, the floor in a broken and faded red, the chairs and the bed chrome yellow, the pillows and the sheet very pale lemon green, the blanket blood-red, the dressing-table orange, the washbasin blue, the window green. I had wished to express utter repose with all these very different tones, you see, among which the only white is the little note given by the mirror with a black frame (to cram in the fourth pair of complementaries as well)." Van Gogh had psychotic episodes, but there is still debate about the cause—among the theories considered have been bipolar disorder, temporal lobe epilepsy, syphilis, schizophrenia, and even toxicity from the foxglove plant (a remedy for mental illness at the time) in combination with lead poisoning from his oil paints and the consumption of absinthe. (Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam.)

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1419

Diseases of the Nervous System

He remembered that during his epileptic fits, or rather immedi-

ately preceding them, he had always experienced a moment or two

when his whole heart, and mind, and body seemed to wake up to

vigour and light; when he became filled with joy and hope, and all his anxieties seemed to be swept away forever; these moments were but presentiments, as it were of the one final second (it was never more than a second) in which the fit came upon him. That second, of course, was inexpressible. When his attack was over, and the prince reflected on his symptoms, he used to say to himself: "These moments, short as they are, when I feel such extreme consciousness of myself, and consequently more of life than at other times, are due only to the disease—to the sudden rupture of normal conditions. Therefore they are not really a higher kind of life, but a lower." This reasoning, however, seemed to end in a paradox, and lead to the further consideration: —"What matter though it be only disease, an abnormal tension of the brain, if when I recall and analyze the moment, it seems to have been one of harmony and beauty in the highest degree—an instant of deepest sensation, overflowing with unbounded joy and rapture, ecstatic devotion, and completest life?" Vague though this sounds, it was perfectly comprehensible to Muishkin, though he knew that it was but a feeble expression of his sensations.*

W

hat, exactly, is the nature of the relationship between

the mind and the brain? Dostoevsky's own experience of

epilepsy profoundly influenced his writing, and in this passage, he probes some of the most profound questions about human experience. Are our thoughts and moods simply transient combinations of chemicals and electrical signals? Do we have any influence over them? If not, can we be held responsible for our actions? What if some of our peak experiences are just happy chemical accidents? Or, as Prince Muishkin wonders, what if some of our peaks are happy accidents of disease? What, then, would it mean to "get better"? Individuals with bipolar disorder, for example, can have a very difficult time relinquishing the expansive feelings and creative energies that can accompany mania. Although these profound questions are the purview of philosophers rather than neuroscientists, few circumstances bring the mind– brain relationship into question as sharply as becoming victim to a

neurological or psychiatric disorder. The range of these conditions

*

Dostoevsky F. The Idiot. Translated by Eva Martin. Project Gutenberg EBook, last updated

May 13, 2017.

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1420

is very wide, from motor disturbances to epilepsy, schizophrenia,

mood imbalances, cognitive disorders, neurodegeneration, and even

aging. The more we learn, the more it becomes apparent that these

diseases exert very broad effects that blur the boundaries between their classifications. So-called movement disorders such as Parkinson disease, for example, involve cognitive and affective changes; disorders of cognition such as autism or schizophrenia can have very physical manifestations. Despite these somewhat fuzzy boundaries, each chapter in this section will examine the principles underlying each major class of disease from the perspective of neuroscience. The emphasis here is on molecu-

lar mechanisms, so far as they are currently understood. It is perhaps surprising that so many different disease conditions seem to converge on one physiological point: synaptic function. In autism and several psychiatric disorders, synaptic development goes awry; in epilepsy, abnormal ion channel activity disturbs the balance of synaptic input from excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Aging and neurodegenerative disorders bring about synaptic loss through gradual alterations in protein and RNA homeostasis that tax normal cellular functions. This observation is offered to help give shape to the material you are about to encounter, but should not be used to oversimplify. Anyone tempted by reductionism would do well to engage with the works

of great artists such as Dostoevsky and Van Gogh, who represent the complexities of human experience in all its anguish and glory. Part Editor: Huda Y. Zoghbi

Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

Seizures and Epilepsy

Part IX

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

| Chapter 59  Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental  Processes  Chapter 60  Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia  Chapter 61  Disorders of Mood and Anxiety  Chapter 62  Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism  Spectrum Disorder  Chapter 63  Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases  of the Nervous System  Chapter 64  The Aging Brain   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

Disorders of the Peripheral Nerve, Neuromuscular Junction,

and Muscle Can Be Distinguished Clinically

A Variety of Diseases Target Motor Neurons and

## Peripheral Nerves Motor Neuron Diseases Do Not Affect Sensory Neurons

## (Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis) Diseases of Peripheral Nerves Affect Conduction of the

Action Potential The Molecular Basis of Some Inherited Peripheral

Neuropathies Has Been Defined Disorders of Synaptic Transmission at the Neuromuscular

Junction Have Multiple Causes Myasthenia Gravis Is the Best-Studied Example of a

## Neuromuscular Junction Disease Treatment of Myasthenia Is Based on the

Physiological Effects and Autoimmune Pathogenesis of the Disease

There Are Two Distinct Congenital Forms of Myasthenia Gravis Lambert-Eaton Syndrome and Botulism Also Alter

Neuromuscular Transmission Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Can Be Inherited

or Acquired Dermatomyositis Exemplifies Acquired Myopathy

## Muscular Dystrophies Are the Most Common Inherited Myopathies

Some Inherited Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Arise From

Genetic Defects in Voltage-Gated Ion Channels Highlights

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1421

… to move things is all that mankind can do, for such the

sole executant is muscle, whether in whispering a syllable

or in felling a forest.

A

Charles Sherrington, 1924

major task of the elaborate information

processing that takes place in the brain is the

contraction of skeletal muscles. The challenge

of deciding when and how to move is, to a large degree, the driving force behind the evolution of the nervous system (Chapter 30). In all but the most primitive animals, movement is generated by specialized muscle cells. There are three general types of muscles: Smooth muscle is used pri-

marily for internal actions such as peristalsis and control of blood flow; cardiac muscle is used exclusively for pumping blood; and skeletal muscle is used primarily for moving bones. In this chapter, we examine a variety of neurological disorders in mammals that affect movement by altering either action potential conduction in a motor nerve, synaptic transmission from nerve to muscle, or muscle contraction itself. In 1925, Charles Sherrington introduced the term motor unit to designate the basic unit of motor function— a motor neuron and the group of muscle fibers it

innervates (Chapter 31). The number of muscle fibers innervated by a single motor neuron varies widely throughout the body depending on the dexterity of the movements being controlled and the mass of the body part to be moved. Thus, eye movements are finely controlled by motor units with fewer than 100 muscle

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

fibers, whereas in the leg, a single motor unit contains

up to 1,000 muscle fibers. In each case, all the muscles

innervated by a motor unit are of the same type. More-

over, motor units are recruited in a fixed order for both voluntary and reflex movements. The smallest motor units are the first to be recruited, joined later by larger units as muscle force increases. The motor unit is a common target of disease. The distinguishing features of diseases of the motor unit vary depending on which functional component is

primarily affected: (1) the cell body of the motor or sensory neuron, (2) the corresponding axons, (3) the neuromuscular junction (the synapse between the motor axon and muscle), or (4) the muscle fibers innervated by the motor neuron. Accordingly, disorders of the motor unit have traditionally been grouped into motor neuron diseases, peripheral neuropathies, disorders of the neuromuscular junction, and primary muscle diseases (myopathies) (Figure 57–1). Patients with peripheral neuropathies experience weakness that arises from abnormal function of motor neurons or their axons, although problems with sensa-

tion can also occur since most peripheral neuropathies also involve sensory neurons. By contrast, in motor neuron diseases, the motor neurons and motor tracts in the spinal cord degenerate but sensory nerves are spared. In myopathies, weakness is caused by degeneration of the muscles with little or no change in motor neurons. In neuromuscular junction diseases, alterations in the neuromuscular synapse lead to weakness that may be intermittent. Clinical and laboratory stud- ies usually distinguish disorders of peripheral nerves from those of the neuromuscular junction or muscle

(Table 57–1). Disorders of the Peripheral Nerve,

Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscle

Can Be Distinguished Clinically

## When a peripheral nerve is cut, the muscles innervated by that nerve immediately become paralyzed and then

waste progressively. Because the nerve carries sensory

as well as motor fibers, sensation in the area innervated by the nerve is also lost and tendon reflexes are lost immediately. The term atrophy (literally, lack of nourishment) refers to the wasting away of a once-normal muscle; because of historical usage the term appears in the names of several diseases that are now regarded as neurogenic. The main symptoms of the myopathies are due to weakness of skeletal muscle and often include dif -ficulty in walking or lifting. Other less common

Motor neuron symptoms include inability of the muscle to relax (myotonia), cramps, pain (myalgia), or the appearance in the urine of the heme-containing protein that gives muscle its red color (myoglobinuria). The muscular dystrophies are myopathies with special characteristics: The diseases are inherited, all symptoms are caused by weakness, the weakness becomes progressively more

diseases

(cell body)

<!-- image -->

Figure 57–1 The four types of motor

unit disorders. Motor unit disorders

are categorized according to the part

of the motor unit that is affected.

Motor neuron diseases affect the cell body of the neuron, while peripheral neuropathies target the axon. Diseases of the neuromuscular junction affect the functioning of the synapse, and myopathies affect muscle fibers.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1422

Diseases of the

neuromuscular

junction

Primary muscle

diseases

(myopathies)

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

Table 57–1 Differential Diagnosis of Disorders of the Motor Unit

Finding

Clinical Nerve Neuromuscular junction Muscle

| Weakness  ++  +  ++  Wasting  ++  −  +  Fasciculations  +  −  −  Cramps  +  −  +/−  Sensory loss  +/−  −  −  Hyperreflexia, Babinski  + (ALS)  −  −  Laboratory  Elevated serum CPK  −  −  ++  Elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein  +/−  −  −  Slowed nerve conduction  +  −  −  Response to repetitive stimulation  Normal  Decremental (MG)  Normal  Incremental (LEMS)  Electromyography  Fibrillation, fasciculation  ++  −  +/−  Duration of potentials  Increased  Normal  Decreased  Amplitude of potentials  Increased  Normal  Decreased  Muscle Biopsy  Isolated fiber atrophy  ++  Normal  +/−  Grouped fiber atrophy  ++  Normal  Normal  Muscle necrosis  Normal  Normal  ++  ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CPK, creatine phosphokinase; LEMS, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome; MG, myasthenia gravis.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

severe, and signs of degeneration and regeneration are a weak voluntary contraction, a series of motor unit

seen histologically.

Distinguishing neurogenic and myopathic dis-

eases may be difficult because both are characterized by weakness of muscle. As a first approximation,

weakness of the distal limbs most often indicates a neurogenic disorder, whereas proximal limb weakness signals a myopathy. The main clinical and laboratory features used for the differential diagnosis of diseases of the motor unit are listed in Table 57–1. One test that is very helpful is needle electromyography (EMG), a clinical procedure in which a small needle is inserted into a muscle to record extracellularly

the electrical activity of several neighboring motor units. Three specific measurements are important: spontaneous activity at rest, the number of motor units under voluntary control, and the duration and amplitude of action potentials in each motor unit. (Normal ranges of values have been established for the amplitude and duration of motor unit potentials; the amplitude is determined by the number of muscle fibers within the motor unit.) In normal muscle, there is usually no activity outside the end-plate in the muscle at rest. During

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1423

potentials is recorded as different motor units become

recruited. In fully active normal muscles, these abun-

dant potentials overlap in an interference pattern so that it is impossible to identify single potentials (Figure 57–2A). In neurogenic disease, the partially denervated muscle is spontaneously active even at rest. The muscle may still contract in response to voluntary motor

commands, but the number of motor units under vol -untary control is smaller than normal because some motor axons have been lost. The loss of motor units is evident in the EMG during a maximal contraction , which shows a pattern of discrete motor unit potentials instead of the profuse interference pattern for normal muscles (Figure 57–2B). In recently denervated muscle, the EMG may also show spontaneous low-amplitude electrical potentials that correspond to the firing of a single muscle fiber, known as fibrillation potentials. As the neurogenic disease progresses, the amplitude and duration of individual motor unit potentials may increase because the remaining axons give off small branches that innervate the muscle fibers denervated

20/01/21 9:00 AM
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

Table 57–1 Differential Diagnosis of Disorders of the Motor Unit

Finding

Clinical Nerve Neuromuscular junction Muscle

| Weakness  ++  +  ++  Wasting  ++  −  +  Fasciculations  +  −  −  Cramps  +  −  +/−  Sensory loss  +/−  −  −  Hyperreflexia, Babinski  + (ALS)  −  −  Laboratory  Elevated serum CPK  −  −  ++  Elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein  +/−  −  −  Slowed nerve conduction  +  −  −  Response to repetitive stimulation  Normal  Decremental (MG)  Normal  Incremental (LEMS)  Electromyography  Fibrillation, fasciculation  ++  −  +/−  Duration of potentials  Increased  Normal  Decreased  Amplitude of potentials  Increased  Normal  Decreased  Muscle Biopsy  Isolated fiber atrophy  ++  Normal  +/−  Grouped fiber atrophy  ++  Normal  Normal  Muscle necrosis  Normal  Normal  ++  ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CPK, creatine phosphokinase; LEMS, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome; MG, myasthenia gravis.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

severe, and signs of degeneration and regeneration are a weak voluntary contraction, a series of motor unit

seen histologically.

Distinguishing neurogenic and myopathic dis-

eases may be difficult because both are characterized by weakness of muscle. As a first approximation,

weakness of the distal limbs most often indicates a neurogenic disorder, whereas proximal limb weakness signals a myopathy. The main clinical and laboratory features used for the differential diagnosis of diseases of the motor unit are listed in Table 57–1. One test that is very helpful is needle electromyography (EMG), a clinical procedure in which a small needle is inserted into a muscle to record extracellularly

the electrical activity of several neighboring motor units. Three specific measurements are important: spontaneous activity at rest, the number of motor units under voluntary control, and the duration and amplitude of action potentials in each motor unit. (Normal ranges of values have been established for the amplitude and duration of motor unit potentials; the amplitude is determined by the number of muscle fibers within the motor unit.) In normal muscle, there is usually no activity outside the end-plate in the muscle at rest. During

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1423

potentials is recorded as different motor units become

recruited. In fully active normal muscles, these abun-

dant potentials overlap in an interference pattern so that it is impossible to identify single potentials (Figure 57–2A). In neurogenic disease, the partially denervated muscle is spontaneously active even at rest. The muscle may still contract in response to voluntary motor

commands, but the number of motor units under vol -untary control is smaller than normal because some motor axons have been lost. The loss of motor units is evident in the EMG during a maximal contraction , which shows a pattern of discrete motor unit potentials instead of the profuse interference pattern for normal muscles (Figure 57–2B). In recently denervated muscle, the EMG may also show spontaneous low-amplitude electrical potentials that correspond to the firing of a single muscle fiber, known as fibrillation potentials. As the neurogenic disease progresses, the amplitude and duration of individual motor unit potentials may increase because the remaining axons give off small branches that innervate the muscle fibers denervated

20/01/21 9:00 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A Normal muscle B Denervated muscle C Myopathy

<!-- image -->

muscle diseases.

A. Typical activity in a normal muscle. The muscle fibers innervated by a single motor neuron are usually not adjacent to one another. When a motor unit potential is recorded by a

needle electrode inserted into the muscle, the highly effective transmission at the neuromuscular junction ensures that each muscle fiber innervated by the same neuron will generate an action potential and contract in response to an action potential in the motor neuron. In the normal, resting muscle, there is no electrical activity recorded from muscle in the electromyogram (EMG). Slight activation of the muscle by a voluntary movement reveals characteristic extracellular electrical responses in muscle (motor unit potentials (MUPs)). Maximal muscle contraction produces a characteristic complex burst of electrical activity from muscle (the interference pattern). B. When motor neurons are diseased, the number of motor units under voluntary control is reduced. The muscle fibers supplied by the degenerating motor neuron (cell A) become

by the loss of other axons. Accordingly, surviving

motor units contain more than the normal number of

muscle fibers.

In myopathic diseases, there is no activity in the muscle at rest and no change in the number of motor

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1424

100 µV

500 µV


µV

denervated muscle fibers. Axons of the surviving motor neuron r-

fire spontaneously even at rest, giving rise to fasciculations, another characteristic of motor neuron disease. Single denervated fibers also fire spontaneously, producing fibrillations (top trace). With loss of nerve input from motor neuron A and reinnervation of the denervated fibers by motor neuron B, activation of motor neuron B produces an enlarged MUP (giant motor unit). In this setting, there is simplification of the interference pattern. C. When muscle is diseased (myopathy), the number of muscle fibers in each motor unit is reduced. Some muscle fibers innervated by the two motor neurons shrink and become nonfunc-

tional. In the electromyogram, the motor unit potentials do not decrease in number but are smaller and of longer duration than normal and are polyphasic. Affected single muscle fibers sometimes contract spontaneously, producing fibrillation. When muscle is mildly activated, the MUPs show reduced amplitudes. After maximal muscle contraction, the interference pattern also shows a reduction in amplitude.

units firing during a contraction. But because there are

fewer surviving muscle fibers in each motor unit, the

motor unit potentials are of longer duration and more

complex, with alternating +/ -polarity (polyphasic), and are smaller in amplitude (Figure 57–2C).

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit


<!-- image -->

(CMAP) in response to electrical stimulation at different


0 40 50

(2), and just above the elbow (3). In normal subjects (left), the

points along the nerve. A. A shock is applied through a proximal surface stimulating electrode (S2) or through a distal stimulating electrode (S1), and the extracellular CMAP in the thumb is measured trans -cutaneously by the recording electrode. The time it takes the action potential to propagate from S2 to the muscle (tS tS2 ) is the proximal latency; the time from S1 to the muscle (tS tS1 ) is the dis -tal latency. The distance between S1 and S2 divided by (tS tS2 – tS tS1 ) gives the conduction velocity. waveforms are the same regardless of the site of stimulation. They are distinguished only by the longer time period required for the waveform to develop as the site of the stimulus is moved up the arm (away from the recording site). When the motor nerve is demyelinated between S1 and S2 but above the wrist, the CMAP is normal when stimulation occurs at the wrist (1) but delayed and desynchronized when stimulation is proximal to the nerve lesion (2 , 3). (Adapted, with permission, from Bromberg 2002.)

The conduction velocities of peripheral motor axons

can also be measured through electrical stimulation and

recording (see Figure 57–3). The conduction velocity of

motor axons is slowed in demyelinating neuropathies but is normal in neuropathies without demyelination (axonal neuropathies). Another test that helps to distinguish myopathic from neurogenic diseases is the measurement of serum enzyme activities. The sarcoplasm of muscle

is rich in soluble enzymes that are normally found in low concentrations in the serum. In many muscle diseases, the concentration of these sarcoplasmic enzymes in serum is elevated, presumably because the diseases affect the integrity of surface membranes of the muscle, allowing the enzymes to leak into the bloodstream. The enzyme activity most commonly

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1425

used for diagnosing myopathy is creatine kinase, an

enzyme that phosphorylates creatine and is impor-

tant in the energy metabolism of muscle.

Muscle histochemical appearance in a biopsy can also provide a useful diagnostic tool. Human muscle fibers are identified by histochemical reactions as

type I or type II, which respectively are either aerobic (enriched for oxidative enzymes) or anaerobic (abundant glycolytic enzymes) (Chapter 31). All muscle fibers innervated by a single motor neuron are of the same histochemical type. However, the muscle fibers of one motor unit are normally interspersed among the muscle fibers of other motor units. In a cross section of healthy muscle, enzyme stains show that oxidative or glycolytic fibers are intermixed in a "checkerboard" pattern.

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

In chronic neurogenic diseases, the muscle inner-

vated by a dying motor neuron becomes atrophic and

some muscle fibers disappear. Axons of surviving

neurons tend to sprout and reinnervate some of the adjacent remaining muscle fibers. Because the motor neuron determines the biochemical and thus histo -chemical properties of a muscle fiber, the reinnervated muscle fibers assume the histochemical properties of the innervating neuron. As a result, the fibers of a muscle in neurogenic disease become clustered by type (a pattern called fiber-type grouping). If the disease is progressive and the neurons in the surviving motor units also become affected, atrophy occurs in groups of adjacent muscle fibers belonging

to the same histochemical type, a process called group atrophy. In contrast, in myopathic diseases, the muscle fibers are affected in a more or less random fashion. Sometimes an inflammatory cellular response is evident, and sometimes there is prominent infiltration of the muscle by fat and connective tissue. Fasciculations—visible twitches of muscle that can be seen as flickers under the skin—are often signs of neurogenic diseases. They result from involuntary

but synchronous contractions of all muscle fibers in a motor unit. Fibrillations—spontaneous contractions within single muscle fibers—can also be signs of ongoing denervation of muscle. Fibrillations are not visible but can be recorded with an EMG. The electrical record of a fibrillation is a low-amplitude potential that reflects electrical activity in a single muscle cell. Electrophysiological studies suggest that fasciculations arise in the motor nerve terminal. In diagnosing motor neuron disorders, clinicians have historically distinguished between so-called lower motor neurons and premotor neurons. Lower motor A Variety of Diseases Target Motor Neurons and Peripheral Nerves

## Motor Neuron Diseases Do Not Affect Sensory Neurons (Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis)

## The best-known disorder of motor neurons is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; Lou Gehrig disease). "Amyotrophy" is another term for neurogenic atro-

phy of muscle; "lateral sclerosis" refers to the hardness felt when the pathologist examines the spinal cord at autopsy. This hardness results from the proliferation of astrocytes and scarring of the lateral columns of the spinal cord due to degeneration of the corticospinal tracts. The symptoms of ALS usually start with painless weakness in a single arm or leg. Typically, the patient, often a man in his 40s or 50s, discovers that he has

trouble in executing fine movements of the hands— typing, playing the piano, playing baseball, fingering coins, or working with tools. This focal weakness then spreads over 3 or 4 years to involve all four limbs, as well as the muscles of chewing, speaking, swallowing, and breathing. Most cases of ALS involve both the upper and the lower motor neurons. Some motor neurons are spared, notably those supplying ocular muscles and those

-involved in voluntary control of bladder sphincters. The typical weakness of the hand is associated with wasting of the small muscles of the hands and feet and fascicu -lations of the muscles of the forearm and upper arm. These signs of lower motor neuron disease are often associated with hyperreflexia, an over-responsiveness in tendon reflexes characteristic of corticospinal upper motor neuron disease. The cause of most cases (90%) of ALS is not known; the disease is progressive and ultimately affects the muscles of respiration. There is no effective treatment for this fatal condition. About 10% of cases are inherited in a dominant manner (Table 57–2). In North America, greater than 25% of inherited cases arise from mutations in the gene

neurons are motor neurons of the spinal cord and brain stem that directly innervate skeletal muscles. Premotor neurons, also known as "upper" motor neurons, originate in the motor cortex and issue commands for move ments to the lower motor neurons through their axons in the corticospinal (pyramidal) tract. Diseases of upper motor neurons can be distinguished from those affecting lower motor neurons by distinct sets of symptoms. Disorders of lower motor

neurons cause atrophy, fasciculations, decreased muscle tone, and loss of tendon reflexes, whereas disorders of upper motor neurons and their axons result in spasticity, overactive tendon reflexes, and abnormal plantar extensor reflex (the Babinski sign). The primary symptom of disorders of the neuromuscular junction is weakness; in some neuromuscular junction diseases, this weakness is quite variable

even over the course of a single day.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1426

C9orf72. The offending genetic defect is an expansion in an intronic hexanucleotide repeat, from 30 or fewer in normal individuals to hundreds or even thousands in affected individuals. Besides giving rise to conventional ALS, mutations in C9orf72 can also cause frontotemporal dementia. The toxicity of the mutant C9orf72 protein probably reflects both a reduction in total activity of the mutant protein and toxic effects of the intronic expansion. For example, the expanded intronic segments produce intranuclear deposits of RNA that likely sequester and inactivate important nuclear proteins. In addition, the expanded RNA is translated to

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Table 57–2 Selected Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Genes

Gene Protein

Protein function Mutations

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit


Proportion of ALS

Familial Sporadic

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

10%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

&lt;1%

of gene splicing. Infrequently, familial ALS is caused

by mutations in genes encoding cytoskeletal proteins

such as profilin-1, dynactin, or tubulin-A4.

Many studies suggest that mutant ALS-associated proteins tend to aggregate, particularly in membraneless organelles called stress granules that form in condi-

tions of cellular distress. Several lines of investigation support the view that aggregates migrate and transmit pathology between adjacent cells, accounting for spread of the disease to different brain regions. Strikingly, mice that express high levels of defective SOD1 or profilin-1 proteins develop a lethal, adult-onset form of motor neuron disease, but mice expressing equivalently high levels of normal SOD1 or profilin-1 proteins do not. These findings are consistent with the concept that the defective protein has gained some sort of toxic function.

20/01/21 9:00 AM

| SOD1  Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase  Superoxide dismutase  &gt;150  20%  2%  DCTN1  Dynactin subunit 1  Component of dynein motor  complex  10  1%  ANG  Angiogenin  Ribonuclease  &gt;10  &lt;1%  TARDBP  TDP-43  RNA-binding protein  &gt;40  5%  FUS  FUS  RNA-binding protein  &gt;40  5%  VCP  Transitional endoplasmic  reticulum ATPase  Ubiquitin segregase  5  1–2%  OPTN  Optineurin  Autophagy adaptor  1  4%  C9orf72  C9orf72  Possible guanine nucleotide  exchange factor  Intronic  GGGGCC  25%  UBQLN2  Ubiquilin 2  Autophagy adaptor  5  &lt;1%  SQSTM1  Sequestosome 1  Autophagy adaptor  10  &lt;1%  ?  FFN1  Profilin-1  Actin-binding protein  5  &lt;1%  HNRNPA1  hnRNP A1  RNA-binding protein  3  &lt;1%  MATR3  Matrin 3  RNA-binding protein  4  &lt;1%  TUBA4A  Tubulin α-4A chain  Microtubule subunit  7  &lt;1%  CHCHD10  Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix  domain-containing protein 10  Mitochondrial protein of  unknown function  2  &lt;1%  TBK1  Serine/threonine-protein kinase  TBK1  Regulates autophagy and  inflammation  10  1%  Source: Modified from Taylor, Brown, and Cleveland 2016.   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

produce peptides composed of repeated couplets of

amino acids, such as poly-(glycine-proline) or poly-

(proline-arginine); some of these are neurotoxic.

Two other genes commonly mutated in ALS are SOD1 and TDP43 . SOD1 encodes the protein copper/ zinc cytosolic superoxide dismutase, whereas TDP43

encodes a 43-kD, RNA-interacting protein that is normally intranuclear but is mislocalized to the cytosol in most cases of ALS (both inherited and sporadic). Mutations in SOD1 and several other ALS genes (eg, ubiquilin-2) destabilize the conformation of the protein product, promoting misfolding and causing adverse consequences to diverse subcellular processes and compartments. By contrast, mutations in TDP43 and a few other ALS genes (eg, FUS) encoding RNA binding proteins act at the RNA level, impairing RNA homeostasis and perturbing critical processes such as surveillance

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1427


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

In the past 10 years, it has also become clear that

motor neuron pathophysiology is modulated by the

reactions of nonneural cells to degeneration in the motor protein hnRNPA1/A2 that normally leads the splic- ing machinery to skip exon 7. By blocking the binding of hnRNPA1/A2, the ASO blocks the inhibitory effect

-of hnRNPA1/A2 on splicing, promoting expression of full-length SMN protein (Figure 57–4B). It seems likely that ASOs will become powerful therapeutic tools with many applications. In this example, ASO is used to promote exon inclusion; as noted below in the discussion on muscle dystrophy, ASO can also be used to promote exon skipping. It can also be used in other paradigms to inhibit or enhance levels of target gene expression. The second approach to treating spinal muscular atrophy has been to deliver the missing SMN gene to spinal motor neurons and muscle using high doses of intra-

neuron. Thus, in most cases of ALS, there are varying degrees of proliferation and activation of microglia, astrocytes, and some populations of lymphocytes, which may begin as compensatory responses but can eventually adversely affect the injured motor neurons. Genetic studies have underscored the importance of non–cellautonomous factors, such as variants that reduce func tion of the microglial gene TREM-2 and enhance the risk of developing not only ALS but also other neurodegenerative disorders (eg, Alzheimer disease). Progressive bulbar palsy is a type of motor neuron disease in which damage is restricted to muscles innervated by cranial nerves, causing dysarthria (difficulty

speaking) and dysphagia (difficulty swallowing). (The term "bulb" is used interchangeably with "pons," the structure at the base of the brain where motor neurons that innervate the face and swallowing muscles reside, and "palsy" means weakness). If only lower motor neurons are involved, the syndrome is called progressive spinal muscular atrophy. Progressive spinal muscular atrophy is actually a developmental motor neuron disorder characterized by weakness, wasting, loss of reflexes, and fascicula- venously infused adeno-associated virus carrying the SMN1 gene. This, too, dramatically augments survival in infantile spinal muscular atrophy (Figure 57–4B). ALS and its variants are restricted to motor neu -rons; they do not affect sensory neurons or autonomic neurons. The acute viral disease poliomyelitis is also

tions. Most cases arise in infancy and are caused by recessively inherited mutations in the gene encoding a protein called survival motor neuron (SMN). Survival in these cases is very short, although there are rare cases that begin in late childhood or even early adulthood and are associated with longer survival of many years. The SMN protein is implicated in trafficking RNA in and out of the nucleus and in the formation of complexes that are important in RNA splicing. The SMN locus on chromosome 5 in humans has two almost identical copies of the SMN gene: SMN1 produces a full-length SMN protein, while alternative splicing of SMN2 causes omission of the seventh exon in the gene, leading to expression of a small amount of full-length SMN and a shortened SMN. The clinical effect of the loss of full-length SMN from mutations at the main locus can be mitigated to some degree by the shortened SMN protein expressed by the SMN2 gene (Figure 57–4A,B). Two treatment strategies have achieved extraordinary benefits in spinal muscular atrophy. In one, small strings of approximately 20 nucleic acids (antisense

oligonucleotides [ASO]s) are administered to alter splicing of the SMN2 gene so that it produces higher levels of the full-length SMN protein (Figure 57-4A). This occurs because the ASO is targeted to bind to the SMN2 RNA and inhibit the action of the RNA binding

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1428

confined to motor neurons. These diseases illustrate the individuality of nerve cells and the principle of selective vulnerability. The basis of this selectivity is, in general, not understood. Diseases of Peripheral Nerves Affect Conduction of the Action Potential

## Diseases of peripheral nerves may affect either axons or myelin. Because motor and sensory axons are bun-

dled together in the same peripheral nerves, disorders

of peripheral nerves usually affect both motor and sensory functions. Some patients with peripheral neuropathy report abnormal, frequently unpleasant, sensory experiences such as numbness, pins-and-needles prickling, or tingling. When these sensations occur spontaneously without an external sensory stimulus, they are called paresthesias. Patients with paresthesias usually have impaired perception of cutaneous sensations (pain and temperature), often because the small fibers that carry these

sensations are selectively affected. This is not always the case, however. Proprioceptive sensations (position and vibration) can be lost without loss of cutaneous sensation. Lack of pain perception may lead to injuries. The sensory deficits are more prominent distally (called a glove-and-stocking pattern), likely because the distal portions of the nerves are most remote from the cell body and therefore most susceptible to disorders that interfere with axonal transport of essential metabolites and proteins. Peripheral neuropathy is first manifested by weakness that is usually distal. Tendon reflexes are usually

20/01/21 9:00 AM

A Production of normal levels of the SMN protein

SMN1 gene SMN2 gene Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit Normal protein from full-length mRNA (exons 1-8)

Abnormal protein

from short mRNA

(missing exon 7)

B. In spinal muscular atrophy, genetic lesions (commonly dele-

tions) in SMN1 lead to a marked reduction in levels of total

SMN protein.

- C. When SMN1 protein is absent, one therapeutic approach is to replace the missing SMN1 gene using an adeno-associated viral vector (AAV) to deliver the missing gene to the central nervous

system and muscle. An alternative approach is to deliver an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) that blocks the effect of hnRNPA1/A2, thereby enhancing production of a full-length mRNA (with all eight exons) from SMN2. This restores SMN protein levels.

without apparent preceding illness. The condition

may be mild or so severe that mechanical ventilation

is required. Cranial nerves may be affected, leading to

paralysis of ocular, facial, and oropharyngeal muscles. The disorder is attributed to an autoimmune attack on peripheral nerves by circulating antibodies. It is therefore treated by removing the offending antibodies by

20/01/21 9:00 AM

<!-- image -->

.

replacement therapy or by manipulating splicing of SMN2

A. Normally, most of the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein is produced from the SMN1 gene, whose mRNA is spliced from eight exons. In normal circumstances, about 90% of the

mRNA has all eight exons, yielding normal levels of the SMN protein. In the adjacent sister gene, SMN2, binding of the protein hnRNPA1/A2 to the SMN2 transcript excludes exon 7; SMN2 therefore makes a shortened SMN protein.

depressed or lost, fasciculation is seen only rarely, and

wasting does not ensue unless the weakness has been

present for many weeks.

Neuropathies may be either acute or chronic. The best-known acute neuropathy is Guillain-Barré syndrome. Most cases follow respiratory infection

or infectious diarrhea, but the syndrome may occur

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1429

hnRNPA1/A2



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

infusions of gamma globulin and plasmapheresis (a

procedure in which blood is removed from a patient,

cells are separated from the antibody-carrying plasma,

and the cells alone are returned to the patient). The chronic neuropathies vary from mild to incapacitating or even fatal conditions. There are many varieties, including genetic diseases (acute intermittent

porphyria, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease), metabolic disorders (diabetes, vitamin B 12 deficiency), toxicities (lead), nutritional disorders (alcoholism, thiamine deficiency), carcinomas (especially carcinoma of the lung), and immunological disorders (plasma cell diseases, amyloidosis). Some chronic disorders, such as neuropathy due to vitamin B 12 deficiency in pernicious anemia, are amenable to therapy. In addition to being acute or chronic, neuropathies may be categorized as demyelinating (in which the myelin sheath breaks down) or axonal (in which the

axon is affected). In demyelinating neuropathies, as might be expected from the role of the myelin sheath in saltatory conduction, conduction velocity is slowed. In axonal neuropathies, the myelin sheath is not affected and conduction velocity is normal. Axonal and demyelinating neuropathies may lead to positive or negative symptoms and signs. The negative signs consist of weakness or paralysis, loss of ten-

don reflexes, and impaired sensation resulting from loss of motor and sensory nerves. The positive symptoms of peripheral neuropathies consist of paresthesias that arise from abnormal impulse activity in sensory fibers and either spontaneous activity of injured nerve fibers or electrical interaction (cross-talk) between abnormal axons, a process called ephaptic transmission to distinguish it from normal synaptic transmission. It is not known why damaged nerves become hyperexcitable. Even lightly tapping the site of injury can evoke a burst of painful sensations in the region over which the nerve is distributed. Negative symptoms, which have been studied more thoroughly than positive symptoms, can be attributed to three basic mechanisms: conduction

block, slowed conduction, and impaired ability to conduct impulses at higher frequencies. Conduction block was first recognized in 1876 when the German neurologist Wilhelm Erb observed that stimulation of an injured peripheral nerve below the site of injury evoked a muscle response, whereas stimulation above the site of injury produced no response. He deduced that the lesion blocked conduction of impulses of central origin, even when the segment of the nerve distal to the lesion was still functional. Later studies confirmed this conclusion by showing that selective application of diphtheria and other toxins produces

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1430

conduction block by causing demyelination only at the

site of application (Figure 57–5).

Why does demyelination produce nerve block,

and how does it lead to slowing of conduction velocity? Conduction velocity is much more rapid in myeli-

nated fibers than in unmyelinated axons for two reasons (Chapter 9). First, there is a direct relationship between conduction velocity and axon diameter, and myelinated axons tend to be larger in diameter. Second, membrane capacitance in the myelinated regions of the axon is lower than at the unmyelinated nodes of Ranvier, greatly speeding up the rate of depolarization and thus conduction. With demyelination, the spatial distribution of ion channels along the denuded axon is not optimal for supporting action potential propagation and may even cause a failure of conduction. When myelin is disrupted by disease, the action potentials in different axons of a nerve begin to conduct at slightly different velocities. As a result, the nerve loses its normal synchrony of conduction in response to a single stimulus. (Figure 57–2 shows how conduction velocities are measured in peripheral nerves.) This slowing and loss of synchrony are thought to account for some of the early clinical signs of demyelinating neuropathy. For example, functions that nor-

mally depend on the arrival of synchronous bursts of neural activity, such as tendon reflexes and vibratory sensation, are lost soon after the onset of a chronic neuropathy. As demyelination becomes more severe, conduction becomes blocked. This block may be intermittent, occurring only at high frequencies of neural firing, or complete (Figure 57–3). The Molecular Basis of Some Inherited Peripheral Neuropathies Has Been Defined

## Myelin proteins are affected in a group of demyelinating hereditary peripheral neuropathies collectively termed Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. CMT is

characterized by muscle weakness and wasting, loss of reflexes, and loss of sensation in the distal parts of the limbs. These symptoms appear in childhood or adolescence and are slowly progressive. One form (type 1) has the features of a demyelinating neuropathy (Figure 57–5). Conduction in peripheral nerves is slow, with histological evidence of demyelina-

tion followed by remyelination. Sometimes, the remyelination leads to gross hypertrophy of the nerves. Type 1 disorders are inexorably progressive, without remissions or exacerbations. Another form (type 2) has normal nerve conduction velocity and is considered an axonal neuropathy without demyelination. Both types 1 and 2 are inherited as autosomal dominant diseases.

20/01/21 9:00 AM

A

Nucleus

<!-- image -->

A. Myelin production and function in the Schwann cell can be

adversely affected by many genetic defects, including abnormalities in transcription factors, ABC (ATP-binding cassette)

transporters in peroxisomes, and multiple proteins implicated in organizing myelin. Viewed microscopically at high power, the site of apposition of the intracellular faces of the Schwann cell membrane appears as a dense line, whereas the apposed extracellular faces are described as the "intraperiod line" (see part C). (Adapted from Lupski 1998.) B. Peripheral axons are wrapped in multiple layers of thin sheaths of myelin that are processes of Schwann cells. The

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1431

Myelin sheath

Cytoplasmic

side

Extracellular

side

Cytoplasmic

side

Lanterman. Three myelin-associated proteins are defective in

three different demyelinating neuropathies: P 0 (Dejerine-Sottas infantile neuropathy), peripheral myelin protein (PMP22) (Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1), and connexin-32 (Cx32) (X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy). (Adapted from Lupski 1998.) C. The rim of cytoplasm in which myelin basic protein (MBP) is located defines the major dense line, whereas the thin layer of residual extracellular space defines the intraperiod line. Muta-

tions in PMP22 and P 0 genes adversely affect the organization of compact myelin. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and Amato 2002.)

20/01/21 9:00 AM

A

B


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Type 1 disease is attributed to mutations on two

different chromosomes (locus heterogeneity). The more

common form (type 1A) is linked to chromosome 17,

while the less common form (1B) is localized to chromosome 1. The genes at these loci have been directly implicated in myelin physiology (Figure 57–5). Type 1A involves a defect in peripheral myelin protein 22, and type 1B the myelin protein P 0 . Moreover, an X-linked form of demyelinating neuropathy occurs because of mutations in the gene expressing connexin-32, a subunit of the gapjunction channels that interconnect myelin folds near the nodes of Ranvier (Figure 57–5B,C). Still other genes have been implicated in inherited demyelination. Some of the genes and proteins implicated in axonal neuropathies are shown in Figure 57–6 and Table 57–3. Genes encoding the neurofilament light

subunit and an axonal motor protein related to kinesin, which is important for transport along microtubules, are mutated in two types of axonal neuropathies. Defects in these genes are associated with peripheral neuropathies with prominent weakness. The mechanisms by which genes alter axonal function in other axonal neuropathies are less evident. As noted above, a wide range of problems other than genetic mutations lead to peripheral neuropathies. Particularly striking are nerve defects associated

with the presence of autoantibodies directed against ion channels in distal peripheral nerves. For example, some individuals with motor unit instability (cramps and fasciculations), as well as sustained or exaggerated muscle contractions caused by hyperexcitability of motor nerves, have serum antibodies directed against one or more axonal voltage-gated K + channels. The prevailing view is that binding of the autoantibodies to the channels reduces K + conductance and thereby depolarizes the axon, leading to augmented and sustained firing of the distal motor nerve and associated muscle contractions. Alterations in ion channel func -tion underlie a variety of neurological disorders, as in acquired disorders of channels in the neuromuscular junction and inherited defects in voltage-gated channels in muscle (discussed below). Disorders of Synaptic Transmission at the

Neuromuscular Junction Have Multiple Causes Growth factor receptors

<!-- image -->

## Many diseases involve disruption of chemical transmission between neurons and their target cells. By ana-

lyzing such abnormalities, researchers have learned a ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters in peroxisomes,

cytosolic enzymes, microtubule motor proteins like the kinesins, neurofilament proteins, and other structural proteins such as gigaxonin. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and Amato 2002.)

great deal about the mechanisms underlying normal synaptic transmission as well as disorders caused by dysfunction at the synapse.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1432

20/01/21 9:00 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Type 1 disease is attributed to mutations on two

different chromosomes (locus heterogeneity). The more

common form (type 1A) is linked to chromosome 17,

while the less common form (1B) is localized to chromosome 1. The genes at these loci have been directly implicated in myelin physiology (Figure 57–5). Type 1A involves a defect in peripheral myelin protein 22, and type 1B the myelin protein P 0 . Moreover, an X-linked form of demyelinating neuropathy occurs because of mutations in the gene expressing connexin-32, a subunit of the gapjunction channels that interconnect myelin folds near the nodes of Ranvier (Figure 57–5B,C). Still other genes have been implicated in inherited demyelination. Some of the genes and proteins implicated in axonal neuropathies are shown in Figure 57–6 and Table 57–3. Genes encoding the neurofilament light

subunit and an axonal motor protein related to kinesin, which is important for transport along microtubules, are mutated in two types of axonal neuropathies. Defects in these genes are associated with peripheral neuropathies with prominent weakness. The mechanisms by which genes alter axonal function in other axonal neuropathies are less evident. As noted above, a wide range of problems other than genetic mutations lead to peripheral neuropathies. Particularly striking are nerve defects associated

with the presence of autoantibodies directed against ion channels in distal peripheral nerves. For example, some individuals with motor unit instability (cramps and fasciculations), as well as sustained or exaggerated muscle contractions caused by hyperexcitability of motor nerves, have serum antibodies directed against one or more axonal voltage-gated K + channels. The prevailing view is that binding of the autoantibodies to the channels reduces K + conductance and thereby depolarizes the axon, leading to augmented and sustained firing of the distal motor nerve and associated muscle contractions. Alterations in ion channel func -tion underlie a variety of neurological disorders, as in acquired disorders of channels in the neuromuscular junction and inherited defects in voltage-gated channels in muscle (discussed below). Disorders of Synaptic Transmission at the

Neuromuscular Junction Have Multiple Causes Growth factor receptors

<!-- image -->

## Many diseases involve disruption of chemical transmission between neurons and their target cells. By ana-

lyzing such abnormalities, researchers have learned a ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters in peroxisomes,

cytosolic enzymes, microtubule motor proteins like the kinesins, neurofilament proteins, and other structural proteins such as gigaxonin. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and Amato 2002.)

great deal about the mechanisms underlying normal synaptic transmission as well as disorders caused by dysfunction at the synapse.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1432

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Table 57–3 Representative Peripheral Neuropathy Genes

Site of

primary

defect Protein Disease Infantile CMT (Dejerine-

Diseases that disrupt transmission at the neu-

| Myelin  Proteolipid myelin  protein 22  Charcot-Marie-Tooth  disease (CMT)  Proteolipid  protein P  0  Sottas neuropathy)  Connexin-32  X-linked CMT  Axon  Kinesin KIF1Bβ  motor protein  Motor predominant  neuropathy  Heat shock  protein 27  Motor predominant  neuropathy  Neurofilament  light subunit  Motor predominant  neuropathy  Tyrosine kinase A  receptor  Congenital sensory  neuropathy  ABC1 transporter  Tangier disease  Transthyretin  Amyloid neuropathy   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

romuscular junction fall into two broad categories:

those that affect the presynaptic terminal and those

that primarily involve the postsynaptic membrane. In both categories, the most intensively studied cases are autoimmune and inherited defects in critical synaptic proteins. Myasthenia Gravis Is the Best-Studied Example of a Neuromuscular Junction Disease

## The most common and extensively studied disease affecting synaptic transmission is myasthenia gravis, a disorder at the neuromuscular junction in skeletal

muscle. Myasthenia gravis (the term means severe weakness of muscle) has two major forms. The most prevalent is the autoimmune form. The second is congenital and heritable; it is not an autoimmune disorder and is heterogeneous. Fewer than 500 of these congenital cases have been identified, but they have provided information about the organization and function of the human neuromuscular junction. This form is discussed later in the chapter. In autoimmune myasthenia gravis, antibodies are produced against components of the postsynaptic end-plate in muscle, such as the nicotinic acetylcholine

(ACh) receptor and muscle-specific tyrosine kinase

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1433

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit


(MuSK). Anti–ACh receptor antibodies interfere

with synaptic transmission by reducing the number

of functional receptors or by impeding the interac-

tion of ACh with its receptors. As a result, communication between the motor neuron and the skeletal muscle becomes weakened. This weakness always affects cranial muscles—eyelids, eye muscles, and oropharyngeal muscles—as well as limb muscles. Its severity of symptoms varies over the course of a single day, from day to day, or over longer periods (giving rise to periods of remission or exacerbation), making myasthenia gravis unlike most other diseases of muscle or nerve. The weakness is reversed by drugs that inhibit acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme that degrades ACh. As one example, when patients are asked to look upward in a sustained gaze, the eyelids tire after several seconds and droop downward (ptosis). Like decremental responses on EMG, this fatiguability and drooping reverse after treatment with inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase (Figure 57–7). When a motor nerve is stimulated at rates of two to five stimuli per second, the amplitude of the compound

A

<!-- image -->

Figure 57–7 Myasthenia gravis often selectively affects the

Rowland, Hoefer, and Aranow 1960.)

A. Severe drooping of the eyelids, or ptosis, is characteristic of myasthenia gravis. This patient also could not move his eyes to look to either side.

<!-- image -->

B. One minute after an intravenous injection of 10 mg of edrophonium, an inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase, both eyes are open and can be moved freely.

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

action potential evoked in normal human muscle

remains constant. In myasthenia gravis, the amplitude

of the evoked compound action potential decreases

rapidly. This pattern of decremental response of the compound muscle action potential to repetitive stimulation of the motor nerve mirrors the clinical symptom of fatiguability in myasthenia. Moreover, this abnormality resembles the pattern induced in normal muscle by d-tubocurarine (the active compound in curare), which blocks nicotinic ACh receptors and inhibits the action of ACh at the neuromuscular junction. Neostigmine (Prostigmin), which inhibits acetylcholinesterase and thus increases the duration of action of ACh at the neuromuscular junction, reverses the decrease in amplitude of evoked compound action potentials in myasthenic patients (Figure 57–8). About 15% of adult patients with myasthenia have benign tumors of the thymus (thymomas). As the symptoms in myasthenic patients are often improved

by removal of these tumors, some element of the thymoma may stimulate autoimmune pathology. Indeed, myasthenia gravis often affects people who have other autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis,

A Normal muscle systemic lupus erythematosus, or Graves disease

(hyperthyroidism).

Normally, an action potential in a motor axon

releases enough ACh from synaptic vesicles to induce a large excitatory end-plate potential with an ampli-

tude of about 70 to 80 mV relative to the resting potential of –90 mV (Chapter 12). Thus, the normal end-plate potential is greater than the threshold needed to initiate an action potential, about –45 mV. In normal muscle, the difference between the threshold and the actual end-plate potential amplitude—the safety factor—is therefore quite large (Figure 57–8). In fact, in many muscles, the amount of ACh released during synaptic transmission can be reduced to as little as 25% of nor -mal before it fails to initiate an action potential. The density of ACh receptors is reduced over time in myasthenia. This reduces the probability that a molecule of ACh will find a receptor before it is hydrolyzed

by the acetylcholinesterase. In addition, the geometry of the end-plate is also disturbed in myasthenia (Figure 57–9). The normal infolding at the junctional folds is reduced and the synaptic cleft is enlarged. These morphological changes increase the diffusion of

B Myasthenic muscle


Safety factor of

transmission

Threshold


successful in triggering an action potential, is constant and

<!-- image -->

B. In the myasthenic neuromuscular junction, postsynaptic

changes reduce the amplitude of the end-plate potential so that under optimal circumstances the end-plate potential may be just

sufficient to produce a muscle action potential. Fluctuations in transmitter release that normally accompany repeated stimulation now cause the end-plate potential to drop below this threshold, leading to conduction failure at that junction (1). The amplitude of the compound action potentials in the muscle declines progressively and shows only a small and variable recovery (2).

<!-- image -->

mission, from Lisak and Barchi 1982.)

A. In the normal neuromuscular junction, the amplitude of the end-plate potential is so large that all fluctuations in the efficiency of transmitter release occur well above the

threshold for a muscle action potential. This results in a large safety factor for synaptic transmission (1). Therefore, during repetitive stimulation of the motor nerve, the amplitude of the compound action potentials, representing the contributions from all muscle fibers in which synaptic transmission is

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1434

Reduced

safety factor

Threshold

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Figure 57–9 Morphological abnormali-

ties of the neuromuscular junction are

characteristic of myasthenia gravis. At

the neuromuscular junction, acetylcholine (ACh) is released by exocytosis of synaptic vesicles at active zones in the nerve terminal. Acetylcholine flows across the synaptic cleft to reach ACh receptors that are concentrated at the peaks of junctional folds. Acetylcholinesterase in the cleft rapidly terminates transmission by hydrolyzing ACh. The myasthenic junction has reduced numbers of ACh receptors, simplified synaptic folds, a widened synaptic space, but a normal nerve terminal.

ACh away from the synaptic cleft and further reduce

<!-- image -->

the probability of ACh interacting with the few remain-

ing functional receptors. As a result, the amplitude of

the end-plate potential is reduced to the point where it is barely above threshold (Figure 57–8). Thus, in myasthenia, synaptic transmission is readily blocked even though the vesicles in the presynaptic terminals contain normal amounts of ACh and

the process of transmitter release is intact. Both the physiological abnormality (the decremental response) and the clinical symptoms (muscle weakness) are partially reversed by drugs that inhibit acetylcholinesterase. This is because the released ACh molecules remain unhydrolyzed for a longer time, and this increases the probability that they will interact with receptors. How do antibodies cause the symptoms of myasthenia? The antibodies do not simply occupy the ACh binding site. Rather, they appear to react with epitopes

elsewhere on the receptor molecule. This increases the turnover of nicotinic ACh receptors, probably because myasthenic antibodies bind and cross-link the receptors, triggering their degradation (Figure 57–9). In addition, some myasthenic antibodies bind proteins of the complement cascade of the immune system, causing lysis of the postsynaptic membrane. Despite the evidence documenting the primary role of antibodies against the nicotinic ACh receptor in myasthenia, about one-fifth of patients with myasthe-

nia do not have these antibodies—including some who respond to anti-immune therapy like plasmapheresis. Instead, the majority of these patients have antibodies to other postsynaptic proteins, such as MuSK (muscles pecific trk-related receptor with a Kringle domain)

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1435

Axon

and lipoprotein-related protein 4 (LPR4), which is an

activator of MuSK. MuSK is a muscle-specific recep-

tor tyrosine kinase that interacts with another post-

synaptic protein, agrin, to organize the nicotinic ACh receptors into clusters at the neuromuscular junction (Chapter 48); it appears to be functionally important both during development and in the adult. The antiMuSK antibodies block some of the normal clustering of the nicotinic ACh receptors following the interaction of agrin with MuSK. Anti-LPR4 antibodies also block ACh receptor clustering. Treatment of Myasthenia Is Based on the Physiological Effects and Autoimmune

Pathogenesis of the Disease

## Anticholinesterases, especially pyridostigmine, provide some symptomatic relief but do not alter the basic

disease. Immunosuppressive therapies such as corti-

costeroids and azathioprine or related drugs suppress antibody synthesis. Intravenous infusions of pooled immunoglobulins reduce levels of the pathogenic autoantibodies and ameliorate symptoms, often within a few days. An analogous benefit is achieved by plasmapheresis, which involves filtering the plasma. Although the benefit of these interventions is short-lived, it may be sufficient to prepare a patient for thymectomy or to support the patient through more severe episodes. There Are Two Distinct Congenital Forms of Myasthenia Gravis

## In two distinct types of myasthenia, symptoms may be present from birth or shortly thereafter. In neonatal

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

Normal Myasthenia gravis



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

myasthenia, the mother herself has autoimmune myas-

thenia that is transmitted passively to the newborn via

the immune system. In congenital myasthenia, the

infant has an inherited defect in some component of the neuromuscular junction, rather than an autoimmune disease, and thus does not have serum antibodies to the nicotinic ACh receptor or MuSK. Congenital myasthenic syndromes fall into three broad groups based on the site of the defect in the neuromuscular synapse: presynaptic, synaptic cleft, and

postsynaptic forms. Clinical features common to all three types include a positive family history, weakness with easy fatigability (present since infancy), drooping of the eyelids (ptosis), a decremental response to repetitive stimulation on EMG, and negative screening for anti-nicotinic ACh receptor antibodies. Subnormal development of the skeletal muscles reflects the fact that normal function at the neuromuscular synapse is required to maintain normal muscle bulk. In one presynaptic form of congenital myasthenia, the enzyme choline acetyltransferase is absent or reduced in the distal motor terminal. This enzyme is

essential for the synthesis of ACh from choline and acetyl-CoA (Chapter 16). In its absence, the synthesis of ACh is impaired. The result is weakness that usually begins in infancy or early childhood. In another presynaptic form of congenital myasthenia, the number of quanta of ACh released after an action potential is less than normal; the molecular basis for this defect is not known. Congenital myasthenia may also result from the absence of acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic cleft. In this circumstance, end-plate potentials and miniature

end-plate potentials are not small, as in autoimmune myasthenia, but are markedly prolonged, which may explain the repetitive response of the evoked muscle potential in those patients. Cytochemical studies indicate that ACh-esterase is absent from the basement membranes. At the same time, nicotinic ACh receptors are preserved. The physiological consequence of ACh-esterase deficiency is sustained action of ACh on the end-plate and ultimately the development of an end-plate myo-

pathy. This myopathy indicates that skeletal muscle can react adversely to excessive stimulation at the neuromuscular junction. In treating this disorder, it is critical to avoid using agents that inhibit ACh-esterase, which can increase the electrical firing at the end-plate and thereby exacerbate the muscle weakness. The majority of congenital myasthenia cases are caused by primary mutations in the genes encoding different subunits of the ACh receptor. The slow

channel syndrome is characterized by prominent limb

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1436

weakness but little weakness of cranial muscles (the

reverse of the pattern usually seen in autoimmune

myasthenia, where muscles of the eyes and orophar-

ynx are almost always affected). End-plate currents are slow to decay, and there is abnormal prolongation of channel opening. The mutations probably act both by increasing the affinity of the nicotinic ACh receptor for ACh, thereby prolonging the effects of this transmitter, and by directly slowing the channel closing rate. In some instances, quinidine is effective therapy for slow channel syndrome because it blocks the open receptorchannel. As with ACh-esterase mutations, end-plate function degenerates due to excessive postsynaptic stimulation, so anticholinesterase medications are potentially dangerous. In the fast channel syndrome, a different set of mutations in one or more nicotinic ACh receptor subunits leads to an accelerated rate of channel closing and

end-plate current decay. The fast channel syndrome may respond to either acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or 3,4-diaminopyridine. The latter blocks a presynaptic potassium conductance and thereby increases the probability of quantal release of ACh, probably by prolonging the action potential. Lambert-Eaton Syndrome and Botulism Also Alter Neuromuscular Transmission

## Some patients with cancer, especially small-cell cancer of the lung, have a syndrome of proximal limb weak-

ness and a neuromuscular disorder with characteristics

that are the opposite of those seen in myasthenia gravis. Instead of a decline in synaptic response to repetitive nerve stimulation, the amplitude of the evoked potential increases; that is, neuromuscular transmission is facilitated. Here, the first postsynaptic potential is abnormally small, but subsequent responses increase in amplitude so that the final summated potential is two to four times the amplitude of the first potential. This disorder, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, is attributed to the action of antibodies against voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels in the presynaptic terminals. It is thought that

these antibodies react with the channels, degrading the channels as the antibody–antigen complex is internalized. Calcium channels similar to those of presynaptic terminals are found in cultured cells from the smallcell carcinoma of the lung; development of antibodies against these antigens in the tumor might be followed by pathogenic action against nerve terminals, another kind of molecular mimicry. A facilitating neuromuscular block is also found in human botulism, as the botulinum toxin also impairs release of ACh from nerve terminals. Both botulism

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

and Lambert-Eaton syndrome are ameliorated by


frequently, the dystrophies are dominantly inherited

administration of calcium gluconate or guanidine,

agents that promote the release of ACh. These drugs are

less effective than immunosuppressive treatments for long-term control of Lambert-Eaton syndrome, which is chronic. Botulism, on the other hand, is transient, and if the patient is kept alive during the acute phase by treating symptoms, the disorder disappears in weeks as the infection is controlled and botulinum is inactivated. Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Can Be Inherited

or Acquired

## The weakness seen in any myopathy is usually attributed to degeneration of muscle fibers. At first, the miss-

ing fibers are replaced by regeneration of new fibers.

Ultimately, however, renewal cannot keep pace and fibers are progressively lost. This leads to the appearance of compound motor unit potentials of brief duration and reduced amplitude. The decreased number of functioning muscle fibers then accounts for the diminished strength, whether the skeletal muscle disease is inherited or acquired. Dermatomyositis Exemplifies Acquired Myopathy

The prototype of an acquired myopathy is dermatomy-

## ositis, defined by two clinical features: rash and myopathy. The rash has a predilection for the face, chest,

and extensor surfaces of joints, including the fingers. The myopathic weakness primarily affects proximal limb muscles. The rash and weakness usually appear simultaneously and become worse in a matter of weeks. The weakness may be mild or life-threatening. This disorder affects children or adults. About 10% of adult patients have malignant tumors. Although the pathogenesis is not known, dermatomyositis is

thought to be an autoimmune disorder of small intramuscular blood vessels. Muscular Dystrophies Are the Most Common Inherited Myopathies

## The best-known inherited muscle diseases are the muscular dystrophies; several major types are distin-

guished by clinical and genetic patterns (Table 57–4).

Some types are characterized by weakness alone (Duchenne, facioscapulohumeral, and limb-girdle dystrophies); others (eg, the myotonic muscular dystrophies) have additional clinical features. Most are recessively inherited and begin in early childhood (Duchenne, Becker, and limb-girdle dystrophy); less

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1437

(facioscapulohumeral or myotonic dystrophy). The

cardinal trait of limb-girdle dystrophies is slowly pro-

gressive proximal weakness; in the myotonic muscular dystrophies, progressive weakness is accompanied by severe muscle stiffness. Duchenne muscular dystrophy affects only males because it is transmitted as an X-linked recessive trait. It starts in early childhood and progresses relatively

rapidly, so that patients are in wheelchairs by age 12 and usually die in their third decade. This dystrophy is caused by mutations that severely reduce levels of dystrophin, a skeletal muscle protein that apparently confers tensile strength to the muscle cell. In a related inherited muscle disorder, Becker muscular dystrophy, dystrophin is present but is either abnormal in size or reduced in quantity. Becker dystrophy is thus typically much milder, although there is considerable clinical variability according to how much dystrophin is retained; individuals with Becker dystrophy typically are able to walk well into adulthood, albeit with weakness of the proximal leg and arm muscles. Dystrophin is encoded by the DMD gene, the second largest human gene, spanning about 2.5 million base pairs, or 1% of the X chromosome and 0.1% of

the total human genome (Figure 57–10A). It contains at least 79 exons that encode a 14-kb mRNA. The inferred amino acid sequence of the dystrophin protein suggests a rod-like structure and a molecular weight of 427,000, with domains similar to those of two cytoskeletal proteins, alpha-actinin and spectrin. Dystrophin is localized to the inner surface of the plasma membrane. The amino terminus of dystrophin is linked to cytoskeletal actin, whereas the carboxy terminus is linked to the extracellular matrix by transmembrane proteins (Figure 57–11). The majority of boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy have a deletion in the DMD gene; about a third have point mutations. In either case, these muta-

tions introduce premature stop codons in the mutant RNA transcripts that prevent synthesis of full-length dystrophin. Becker dystrophy is also caused by deletions and missense mutations, but the mutations do not introduce stop codons. The resulting dystrophin protein is nearly normal in length and can at least partially substitute for normal dystrophin (Figure 57–10B). Some boys with Duchenne dystrophy benefit from treatment with ASOs that cause skipping of specific mutant exons, generating a shortened but partially functional dystrophin protein (Figure 57–10C). Another promising approach is to deliver a form of the DMD gene to the muscle using adeno-associated virus. While the full-length DMD gene is too large to fit

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Table 57–4 Representative Muscular Dystrophy Genes

Site of primary defect

Extracellular matrix Protein Collagen VI α1, α2, and α3

Disease

Bethlem myopathy

| Merosin laminin α2-subunit  Congenital myopathy  Transmembrane  α-Sarcoglycan  LGMD-2D  β-Sarcoglycan  LGMD-2E  χ-Sarcoglycan  LGMD-2C  σ-Sarcoglycan  LGMD-2F  Dysferlin  LGMD-2B, Miyoshi myopathy  Caveolin-3  LGMD-1C, rippling muscle disease  α7-Integrin  Congenital myopathy  XK protein  McLeod syndrome  Submembrane  Dystrophin  Duchenne, Becker dystrophies  Sarcomere/myofibrils  Tropomyosin B  Nemaline rod myopathy  Calpain  LGMD-2A  Titin  Distal (Udd) dystrophy  Nebulin  Nemaline rod myopathy  Telethonin  LGMD-2G  Skeletal muscle actin  Nemaline rod myopathy  Troponin  Nemaline rod myopathy  Cytoplasm  Desmin  Desmin storage myopathy  αβ-Crystallin  Distal myofibrillar myopathy  Selenoprotein  Rigid spine syndrome  Plectin  Epidermolysis bullosa simplex  Sarcoplasmic reticulum  Ryanodine receptor  Central core disease, malignant hyperthermia  SERCA1  Brody myopathy  Nucleus  Emerin  Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy  Lamin A/C  Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy  Poly A binding protein, repeat  Oculopharyngeal dystrophy  Enzymes/miscellaneous  Myotonin kinase, CTG repeat  Myotonic dystrophy  Zinc finger 9, CCTG repeat  Proximal myotonic dystrophy  Epimerase  Inclusion body myositis  Myotubularin  Myotubular myopathy  Chorein  Chorea-acanthocytosis  Golgi apparatus  Fukutin  Fukuyama congenital dystrophy  Fukutin-related peptide  Limb-girdle dystrophy  POMT1  Congenital muscular dystrophy  POMGnT1  Congenital muscular dystrophy  LGMD, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1438

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

within that virus, there is evidence that some truncated


lead to the limb-girdle phenotype, characterized by

versions of dystrophin retain partial function; indeed,

severely shortened dystrophins have been discovered

in patients with very mild forms of Becker dystrophy. Packaging of genes encoding mini-dystrophins into the adeno-associated virus is feasible, permitting delivery to skeletal muscle and improvement of the dystrophic process (Figure 57–10C). The discovery of the affected gene product in Duchenne muscular dystrophy by Louis Kunkel in the mid-1980s stimulated rapid discovery of numer-

ous other novel muscle proteins, some with an intimate relationship to dystrophin. As a result, the primary genetic and protein defects underlying most major muscular dystrophies have now been identified (Figure 57–11). From these, several themes have emerged in our understanding of the biology of the muscular dystrophies. First, and perhaps most important, is the concept that normal muscle requires a functional unit linking the contractile proteins through dystrophin slowly progressive proximal weakness of the arms and legs. Most are recessively inherited; mutations in both copies of a particular gene prevent expression of the normal protein product and lead to loss of function of that protein. Some limb-girdle genes are dominantly transmitted; mutations in only one copy of the gene in a pair can cause pathology. As in most primary muscle diseases, in the limb-girdle phenotype, weakness is prominent in the torso and in proximal muscles of the arms and legs. Why this pattern is so common is not known, especially since the affected proteins are expressed in both distal and proximal muscles. The pattern of degeneration most likely reflects muscle use. The proximal muscles are, on average, more subject to low-level but chronic contractile activity because they serve as antigravity muscles. Myotonic dystrophy has several distinctive features including an autosomal inheritance pattern, weakness that is predominantly distal, involvement

to a complex of dystrophin-associated transmembrane proteins (sarcoglycans, β-dystroglycan) that, in turn, are linked to proteins at the membrane surface (eg, α-dystroglycan) and the extracellular matrix (eg, laminin). Disruption of this linked network due to a mutation in one of the proteins leads to reductions in levels of many of the proteins (Table 57–4). Second, some of these proteins have attached sugar groups that are critical for binding the extracellular matrix proteins. Genetic defects in several of the

intracellular Golgi proteins (fukutin, fukutin-related peptide, POMT1, POMTGn1) impair the deposition of the sugars (glycosylation) of the transmembrane proteins, often leading to aberrant muscle development and pronounced clinical pathology, not only in muscle but sometimes in the brain. Third, the integrity of the extracellular matrix is essential for normal muscle function: Defects in extra cellular matrix proteins (laminin α2 or α7-integrin)

also cause muscular dystrophies. Fourth, other proteins (eg, dysferlin), distinct from those complexed with dystrophin, mediate membrane repair after injury. Whereas dystrophin is important in

-of nonmuscle tissues, and striking muscle stiffness (myotonia). The stiffness is induced by excessive electrical discharges of the muscle membrane associated with voluntary muscle contractions or percussion or electrical stimulation of the muscle. It is most intense within the first few movements after a period of rest and improves with continued muscular activity ("warm-up" phenomenon). Patients typically have difficulty relaxing the grip of a handshake for several seconds, opening the eyelids after forceful squinting, or moving their legs with the first few steps after rising from a chair. EMG demonstrates that the muscle cell membrane is electrically hyperexcitable in myotonic dystrophy; after a contraction, bursts of repetitive action potentials wax and wane in amplitude and frequency (20–100 Hz) over several seconds and thereby delay relaxation (Figure 57–12A). This sustained contraction is truly myogenic and independent of nerve supply because it persists after blockade of either the incoming motor nerve or neuromuscular transmission with agents such as curare. The manifestations of myotonic dystrophy are not confined to muscles, however. Almost all patients have cataracts; affected men commonly have testicular

maintaining the tensile strength and integrity of the muscle membrane, dysferlin and its binding partner caveolin-3 are central to generating rafts of vesicles that coalesce and heal breaches that occur in the mus cle membrane. It is of clinical interest that disorders due to defects in many of these proteins are less aggressive and more slowly disabling than those in Duchenne dystrophy.

Defects in this diverse group of skeletal muscle proteins

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1439

-atrophy and baldness and often develop cardiac conduction system defects that lead to irregularities in the heartbeat. The primary genetic defect is a dominantly transmitted expansion of a triplet of base pairs (CTG) in a noncoding region of a gene (myotonin kinase) on chromosome 19. RNA transcripts of the expanded CTG segments accumulate in the nucleus and alter splicing of several critical genes, including the ClC-1 Cl – channel. Loss of function of this channel leads to

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A The DMD gene

Xp21

<!-- image -->

~2 × 10


base pairs

~14 × 10

base pairs

~3.6 × 10


amino acids

<!-- image -->

1 Deletion of single exon results in severe (Duchenne) dystrophy

Deletion

<!-- image -->

2 Deletion of four exons results in milder (Becker) dystrophy

Deletion Dystrophin staining in Duchenne dystrophy semifunctional dystrophin Allowed to persist by cell

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Duchenne dystrophy

Exons 48, 49, 50 deleted

46 47

51 52

ASO-mediated exon skipping therapy

<!-- image -->

Exons 48, 49, 50 deleted

46 47

51 52

<!-- image -->

Gene

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1440

Normal dystrophin staining

Gene therapy

AAV with


mini gene

Therapeutic level of

mini dystrophin produced

20/01/21 9:00 AM

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

excessive electrical activity in skeletal muscle and, as

a consequence, myotonia. As discussed below, direct

mutations in the same Cl

–

channel gene can lead to a

similar abnormal pattern of muscle activity. Some Inherited Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Arise From Genetic Defects in Voltage-Gated Ion

Channels on inactivation of Na

+


channels and the opening of

delayed-rectifier voltage-gated K

+

channels similar to

those in axons. This repolarization is also augmented

-

by Cl – –
 influx through the ClC-1 Cl – channels. Inherited muscle diseases arise from mutations in any one of these channels. The electrical coupling of the end-plate potential to depolarization of the transverse tubules is disrupted in several inherited diseases of muscle. These disor

## The electrical excitability of skeletal muscle is essential to the rapid and nearly synchronous contraction

of an entire muscle fiber. The depolarizing end-plate

potential at the neuromuscular junction triggers an action potential that propagates longitudinally along the surface of the muscle fiber and radially inward along the transverse tubules, invaginations of the fiber membrane in apposition with the sarcoplasmic reticulum (Chapter 31). Depolarization of the transverse tubules induces a conformational change in L-type voltage-gated Ca channels that is directly transmitted to Ca 2+

channels (the ryanodine receptors) in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, causing the channels to open. The release of Ca 2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum raises myoplasmic Ca 2+ and thus activates adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent movement of actin-myosin filaments. Normally, one action potential is generated in a muscle fiber for each end-plate potential. Repolarization of the muscle action potential depends

2+ release ders reflect a variety of defects in excitability, ranging from complete failure of action potential generation to prolonged bursts of repetitive discharges in response to a single stimulus (Figure 57–12). The derangements of muscle fiber excitability are transient and result in periodic paralysis from reduced excitability or myotonia from hyperexcitability. Between episodes, muscle function is normal. These are rare diseases of skeletal muscle, with a prevalence of 1 per 100,000 or less. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, except for one form of myotonia. Weakness may be so severe during an attack of periodic paralysis that a patient is bedridden for hours, unable to raise an arm or leg off the bed. Fortunately,

during such attacks, the muscles of respiration and swallowing are spared, so life-threatening respiratory arrest does not occur; consciousness and sensation are also spared. Attack frequency varies from almost daily to only a few in a lifetime. During an attack, the resting potential of affected muscles is depolarized from a normal value of –90 mV

Figure 57–10 (Opposite) Two forms of muscular dystro-

phy are caused by deletion mutations in the dystrophin

gene. (After Hoffman and Kunkel 1989.)

Functional dystrophin is then almost totally absent. 2. If the

deletion preserves the reading frame, a dystrophin mol-

ecule is produced with an internal deletion but intact ends.

## A. The relative position of the DMD gene within the Xp21 region of the X chromosome. An enlargement of this locus shows the 79 exons (light blue lines) and introns (dark blue 6

lines) defining the gene with about 2.0 × 10 base pairs. Transcription of the gene gives rise to mRNA (about 14 × 10 3 pairs), and translation of this mRNA gives rise to the protein dystrophin (molecular weight 427,000). B. A deletion that disrupts the reading frame results in the clinically severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy, whereas a deletion that preserves the reading frame usually results

base Although the protein is smaller than normal and may be present in less than normal amounts, it can often suffice to preserve some muscle function. C. One approach to correcting a deletion of the DMD gene is to induce formation of an mRNA transcript that skips one or more exons to restore the reading frame. For example, when

in the clinically milder Becker muscular dystrophy. In both cases, the gene is transcribed into mRNA and the exons flanking the deletion are spliced together. 1. If the borders of neighboring exons do not maintain the translational reading frame, then incorrect amino acids are inserted into the growing polypeptide chain until an abnormal stop codon is reached, causing premature termination of the protein. The truncated protein may be unstable, may fail to be localized in the membrane, or may fail to bind to glycoproteins.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1441

there is a deletion of exons 48, 49, and 50, the splicing of exon 47 to exon 51 yields a transcript that is out of frame, in which a stop codon is introduced, preventing production of dystrophin. However, addition of an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) that binds exon 51 and prevents its splicing will promote the inframe splicing of exon 47 to exon 52. Although this transcript is slightly shorter than normal, as is the resulting dystrophin protein, the protein will nonetheless function well enough to ameliorate the muscle degeneration. Another therapeutic approach is to deliver a short form of the dystrophin gene (mini- or microdystrophin, ~30% of the full-length protein) to the muscle using adeno-associated virus (AAV); full-length dystrophin is too large to be delivered within the AAV.

20/01/21 9:00 AM
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

excessive electrical activity in skeletal muscle and, as

a consequence, myotonia. As discussed below, direct

mutations in the same Cl

–

channel gene can lead to a

similar abnormal pattern of muscle activity. Some Inherited Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Arise From Genetic Defects in Voltage-Gated Ion

Channels on inactivation of Na

+


channels and the opening of

delayed-rectifier voltage-gated K

+

channels similar to

those in axons. This repolarization is also augmented

-

by Cl – –
 influx through the ClC-1 Cl – channels. Inherited muscle diseases arise from mutations in any one of these channels. The electrical coupling of the end-plate potential to depolarization of the transverse tubules is disrupted in several inherited diseases of muscle. These disor

## The electrical excitability of skeletal muscle is essential to the rapid and nearly synchronous contraction

of an entire muscle fiber. The depolarizing end-plate

potential at the neuromuscular junction triggers an action potential that propagates longitudinally along the surface of the muscle fiber and radially inward along the transverse tubules, invaginations of the fiber membrane in apposition with the sarcoplasmic reticulum (Chapter 31). Depolarization of the transverse tubules induces a conformational change in L-type voltage-gated Ca channels that is directly transmitted to Ca 2+

channels (the ryanodine receptors) in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, causing the channels to open. The release of Ca 2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum raises myoplasmic Ca 2+ and thus activates adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent movement of actin-myosin filaments. Normally, one action potential is generated in a muscle fiber for each end-plate potential. Repolarization of the muscle action potential depends

2+ release ders reflect a variety of defects in excitability, ranging from complete failure of action potential generation to prolonged bursts of repetitive discharges in response to a single stimulus (Figure 57–12). The derangements of muscle fiber excitability are transient and result in periodic paralysis from reduced excitability or myotonia from hyperexcitability. Between episodes, muscle function is normal. These are rare diseases of skeletal muscle, with a prevalence of 1 per 100,000 or less. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, except for one form of myotonia. Weakness may be so severe during an attack of periodic paralysis that a patient is bedridden for hours, unable to raise an arm or leg off the bed. Fortunately,

during such attacks, the muscles of respiration and swallowing are spared, so life-threatening respiratory arrest does not occur; consciousness and sensation are also spared. Attack frequency varies from almost daily to only a few in a lifetime. During an attack, the resting potential of affected muscles is depolarized from a normal value of –90 mV

Figure 57–10 (Opposite) Two forms of muscular dystro-

phy are caused by deletion mutations in the dystrophin

gene. (After Hoffman and Kunkel 1989.)

Functional dystrophin is then almost totally absent. 2. If the

deletion preserves the reading frame, a dystrophin mol-

ecule is produced with an internal deletion but intact ends.

## A. The relative position of the DMD gene within the Xp21 region of the X chromosome. An enlargement of this locus shows the 79 exons (light blue lines) and introns (dark blue 6

lines) defining the gene with about 2.0 × 10 base pairs. Transcription of the gene gives rise to mRNA (about 14 × 10 3 pairs), and translation of this mRNA gives rise to the protein dystrophin (molecular weight 427,000). B. A deletion that disrupts the reading frame results in the clinically severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy, whereas a deletion that preserves the reading frame usually results

base Although the protein is smaller than normal and may be present in less than normal amounts, it can often suffice to preserve some muscle function. C. One approach to correcting a deletion of the DMD gene is to induce formation of an mRNA transcript that skips one or more exons to restore the reading frame. For example, when

in the clinically milder Becker muscular dystrophy. In both cases, the gene is transcribed into mRNA and the exons flanking the deletion are spliced together. 1. If the borders of neighboring exons do not maintain the translational reading frame, then incorrect amino acids are inserted into the growing polypeptide chain until an abnormal stop codon is reached, causing premature termination of the protein. The truncated protein may be unstable, may fail to be localized in the membrane, or may fail to bind to glycoproteins.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1441

there is a deletion of exons 48, 49, and 50, the splicing of exon 47 to exon 51 yields a transcript that is out of frame, in which a stop codon is introduced, preventing production of dystrophin. However, addition of an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) that binds exon 51 and prevents its splicing will promote the inframe splicing of exon 47 to exon 52. Although this transcript is slightly shorter than normal, as is the resulting dystrophin protein, the protein will nonetheless function well enough to ameliorate the muscle degeneration. Another therapeutic approach is to deliver a short form of the dystrophin gene (mini- or microdystrophin, ~30% of the full-length protein) to the muscle using adeno-associated virus (AAV); full-length dystrophin is too large to be delivered within the AAV.

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Mutations accelerate

muscle breakdown Mutations slow muscle repair

<!-- image -->

repair after injury. For example, a deficiency of dystro-

phin, a submembrane protein, causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Dystrophin interacts with complexes of other membrane proteins that are mutated in other dystrophies, including the dystroglycans and the sarcoglycans, which are closely associated with extracellular proteins such as laminin α2 and collagen. Several other proteins mutated in

to about –60 mV. At this potential, most Na

+

channels

are inactivated, rendering the muscle fiber chronically

refractory and thus unable to generate action poten-

tials. Recovery of strength occurs spontaneously and is associated with repolarization to a resting potential within a few millivolts of normal and recovery of excitability. Two variants of periodic paralysis have been delineated. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis attacks occur during periods of high venous K + (≥6.0 mM ver-

sus normal levels of 3.5–4.5 mM). Ingesting foods with

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1442

Extracellular

side

Cytoplasmic

side

different forms of muscular dystrophy are normally present

in the Golgi apparatus, where they are essential for adding

sugar groups to membrane proteins. These include POMT1

(protein-O-mannosyl transferase 1), POMGnT1 (protein-Omannosyl α-,2-N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase), fukutin, fukutin-related peptide, and a selenoprotein. Dysferlin, which is mutated in still other dystrophies, is involved in the repair of skeletal muscle membrane after injury. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and Mendell 2005.)

high K

+

content such as bananas or fruit juice may trig-

ger an attack. Conversely, hypokalemic periodic paral-

ysis presents as episodic weakness in association with

low blood K + (≤2.5 mM). Affected muscle is paradoxically depolarized in the setting of reduced extracellular K + , which shifts the reversal potential for K + to more negative values. Both forms are inherited as autosomal dominant traits. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is caused by missense mutations in a gene that encodes the pore-forming subunit of a voltage-gated Na + channel

20/01/21 9:00 AM

A

<!-- image -->

channels

<!-- image -->

100 µV

20 ms

Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis muscle

<!-- image -->

muscle.

A. The electrical signature of myotonia (muscle stiffness) is a rapid burst of action potentials in response to a single stimulus. The action potentials, here shown in extracellular recordings,

vary in amplitude and wax and wane in frequency. Such a burst may follow a voluntary muscle contraction or a mechanical stimulus, such as percussion of the muscle. B. Cell-attached patch recordings from cultured human muscle cells. In normal muscle, the Na + channels open early and briefly in response to a 60 msec voltage-clamp depolarization




<!-- image -->



<!-- image -->



<!-- image -->




150 200




600 700

mA/cm2




400 500

individual records) persists in the hyperkalemic muscle

following inactivation. (Reproduced, with permission, from Cannon 1996.) C. Even modest disruption of Na + channel inactivation is sufficient to produce bursts of myotonic discharges or depolarizationinduced loss of excitability. These computer simulation records

channel), the show muscle voltage in response to depolarizing current injection (dashed line). Among the total pool of mutant channels, a small fraction (f) fails to inactivate normally. In these simulations, f was varied from normal to values appropriate for myotonic or paralytic muscle. (Reproduced, with permission, from Cannon 1996.)

20/01/21 9:00 AM

from –120 mV to –40 mV. In muscle from patients with hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (defective M1592V Na +

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1443

Normal (f = 0.001)


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System


Cation

leak Voltage sensor

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 57–13 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) is

caused by leaky ion channels.

A. In HypoPP, missense mutations in the voltage-sensor domains


of the contribution from the inward rectifier K

+

channel in low

]. Normally, this depolarization occurs only at extremely

low [K

+

] (&lt;2 mM) and is not seen in healthy people, but for

create leaky Ca 2+ or Na + channels that allow cation influx via an anomalous pathway separate from the channel pore.

B. Although this leak is small (~0.5% of the total resting membrane conductance), model simulations show that it causes an increased susceptibility to depolarization of resting

expressed in skeletal muscle. The resulting mutant Na potential (Vr Vr ), resulting in inexcitability and weakness as the external [K + ] is lowered. This paradoxical depolarization of Vr diverges from the Nernst potential for K + (E K ) because of loss

+ excitability in low extracellular K + . A rare form of periVr patients with HypoPP, the cation leak shifts the depolarization point into the physiological range of [K + ]. For this simulation, in 3.3 mM [K + ] (line b), excitability is preserved for normals (Vr Vr = –95.6 mV), whereas HypoPP fibers may be excitable (Vr Vr = –89 mV) or refractory and inexcitable (Vr Vr = –67.7 mV). Reduction of [K + ] to 3.0 mM (line a) results in complete loss of excitability for all HypoPP fibers (–66.3 mV) and retained excitability for normal fibers (Vr Vr = –97.8 mV). (Adapted, with permission, from Cannon 2017.)

channels have inactivation defects. Subtle inactivation odic paralysis that is characterized by weakness, devel-

defects produce myotonia, whereas more pronounced opmental defects, and cardiac irritability is caused by

+ primary mutations in an inwardly rectifying K + channel important for the resting potential (Figure 57–13). In myotonia congenita, muscle stiffness is present from birth and is nonprogressive. Unlike myotonic dystrophy, there is no muscle wasting, permanent

muscle weakness, or other organ involvement. Congenital myotonia is a consequence of mutations in the gene coding for the ClC-1 Cl – –
 channel in skeletal mus -cle membrane (Figure 57–14). The resultant decrease

Periodic paralysis

Andersen

syndrome

+

channel

Kir2.1

some by periodic paralysis without myotonia, and some by both

myotonia and paralysis. Some clinical disorders (eg, hypoka-

lemic periodic paralysis) can arise from defects in different

defects result in chronic depolarization and loss of excitability with paralysis (Figure 57–12A–C). Hypokalemic paralysis is caused by missense mutations in the voltage-sensor domains of either Ca 2+ channels or Na channels in skeletal muscle. Disruption of the voltagesensor domain allows an influx of ion current through an anomalous pathway, separate from the channel pore (Figure 57–13). This current "leak" in resting fibers produces a susceptibility to depolarization and loss of

Myotonia

<!-- image -->

gated ion channels in the skeletal muscle membrane. Some

of these channel disorders are characterized only by myotonia,

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1444

channels in different individuals.

–60


20/01/21 9:00 AM

in Cl

–

Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit

–
 influx leads to membrane depolarization and


invaluable for the analysis of mechanisms of dis-

repetitive firing. The disease is inherited as a domi-

nant, semi-dominant, or recessive trait.

Highlights

1. Distinct disorders arise from pathology in differ-

ent components of the motor unit. Pure motor

diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or

- spinal muscular atrophy are caused by loss of motor neurons, whereas combined motor and sensory features are present in most peripheral nerve disorders. These disorders usually spare eye movements and the eyelids. 2. Pure motor weakness, sometimes highly variable in severity over time, is also caused by disorders of the neuromuscular junction, which may begin
- early in life (congenital or neonatal myasthenia) or in childhood or adulthood (commonly autoimmune myasthenia gravis). The latter often involves eyelids and facial muscles. 3. Many forms of weakness are caused by mutations in genes that are important in skeletal muscle. These disorders usually become evident in
- infancy or childhood, involve the proximal more than the distal muscles, and progress relentlessly. Some (eg, Duchenne muscular dystrophy) also entail degeneration of cardiac muscle. 4. Inherited diseases of skeletal muscle with tran sient episodes of weakness (periodic paralysis) or involuntary after-contractions lasting seconds

Selected Reading

Brown RH, Al-Chalabi A. 2017. Amyotrophic lateral sclero-

sis. N Engl J Med 377:162–172.

Cannon SC. 2015. Channelopathies of skeletal muscle excit-

- ability. Compr Physiol 5:761–790. Engel AG, Shen X-M, Selcen D, et al. 2015. Congenital myas-
- -thenic syndromes: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. Lancet Neurol 14:420–434.
- (myotonia) are caused by missense mutations in voltage-gated ion channels. During an episode of weakness, muscle fibers are depolarized and refractory from conducting action potentials. This intermittent failure to maintain the resting potential may arise from gain-of-function mutations in Na channels, loss-of-function mutations in K nels, or anomalous leakage currents in Na + channels. Myotonia is a hyperexcitable state of skeletal muscle caused by Cl – channel loss-of-function or Na + channel gain-of-function mutations. 5. Studies of the diseases of the peripheral nervous system show the powerful synergy between clinical and basic neuroscience. For most of the
- disorders inherited as Mendelian traits, molecular genetic analyses have led to the description of causative defects in muscle and nerve proteins, beginning only with the clinical data in affected families and DNA from family members. 6. Small animal models of many of these disorders, with precisely defined genetic defects, are proving

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1445

- Fridman V, Reilly MM. 2015. Inherited neuropathies. Semin Neurol 35:407–423. Gilhus NE, Verschuuren JJ. 2015 Myasthenia gravis: sub-
- group classification and therapeutic strategies. Lancet Neurol 14:1023–1036.
+ chan -Ranum LP, Day JW. 2004. Pathogenic RNA repeats: an expanding role in genetic disease. Trends Genet 20:506–512.

+

- or Ca 2+ References

Bromberg MB. 2002. Acute and chronic dysimmune poly-

neuropathies. In: WF Brown, CF Bolton, MJ Aminoff

(eds). Neuromuscular Function and Disease, p. 1048, Fig. 58–2.

- New York: Elsevier Science. Bromberg MB, Smith A, Gordon MD. 2002. Toward an efficient method to evaluate peripheral neuropathies. J Clin Neuromuscular Dis 3:172–182.
- Brown RH Jr, Amato AA. 2002. Inherited peripheral neuropathies: classification, clinical features and review of molecular pathophysiology. In: WF Brown, CF Bolton, MJ
- Aminoff (eds). Neuromuscular Function and Disease, p. 624, Fig. 35–2. New York: Elsevier Science. Brown RH, Mendell J. 2005. Muscular dystrophy. In: Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill.

20/01/21 9:00 AM

ease pathogenesis and studies of new treatments.

Combined with innovation in new biological ther-

- apies (gene therapy, gene silencing), these models have led to transformative successes in human tri -als (eg, spinal muscular atrophy). 7. In several of these disorders, a new generation of molecular therapies (eg, antisense oligonucleotides or viral-mediated gene delivery) that aug-
- ment function of the mutant genes is substantially improving clinical outcomes.

Robert H. Brown

Stephen C. Cannon

Lewis P. Rowland


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Cannon SC. 2010. Voltage-sensor mutations in channelopa-

thies of skeletal muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 588:1887–1895.

Cannon SC. 1996. Ion channel defects and aberrant excitabil

-

- ity in myotonia and periodic paralysis. Trends Neurosci 19:3–10.
- Cannon SC. 2017. Sodium channelopathies of skeletal muscle. Handb Exp Pharm 246:309–330. Cannon SC, Brown RH Jr, Corey DP. 1991. A sodium chan-
- nel defect in hyperkalemic periodic paralysis: potassiuminduced failure of inactivation. Neuron 64:619–626.
- Cannon SC, Brown RH Jr, Corey DP. 1993. Theoretical reconstruction of myotonia and paralysis caused by incomplete inactivation of sodium channels. Biophys J 66:270–288.
- Chamberlain JR, Chamberlain JS. 2017. Progress toward molecular therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Mol Ther 25:1125–1131.
- Cull-Candy SG, Miledi R, Trautmann A. 1979. End-plate currents and acetylcholine noise at normal and myasthenic human endplates. J Physiol (Lond) 86:353–380.
- Drachman DB. 1983. Myasthenia gravis: immunology of a receptor disorder. Trends Neurosci 6:446–451. Finkel RS, Mercuri E, Darras BT, et al. 2017. Nusinersen ver-
- sus sham control in infantile-onset spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl J Med 377:1723–1732.
- Gilhus NE, Verschuuren JJ. 2015. Myasthenia gravis: subgroup classification and therapeutic strategies. Lancet Neurol 14:1023–1036.
- Hoffman EP, Brown RH, Kunkel LM. 1987. Dystrophin: the protein product of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy locus. Cell 51:919–928.

Kandel-Ch57\_1417-1446.indd 1446

Hoffman EP, Kunkel LM. 1989. Dystrophin in Duchenne/

Becker muscular dystrophy. Neuron 2:1019–1029.

Lisak RP, Barchi RL. 1982. Myasthenia Gravis. Philadelphia:

- Saunders. Lupski JR. 1998. Molecular genetics of peripheral neuropa-
- thies. In: JB Martin (ed). Molecular Neurology, pp. 239–256. New York: Scientific American.
- Mendell JR, Al-Zaidy S, Shell R, et al. 2017. Single-dose genereplacement therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl J Med 377:1713–1722.
- Mendell JR, Goemans N, Lowes LP, et al. 2016. Longitudinal effect of etiplersen versus historical control on ambulation in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Ann Neurol 79:257–271.
- Milone M. 2017. Diagnosis and management of immunemediated myopathies. Mayo Clin Proc 92:826–837. Newsom-Davis J, Buckley C, Clover L, et al. 2003. Autoim-
- mune disorders of neuronal potassium channels. Ann NY Acad Sci 998:202–210.
- Patrick J, Lindstrom J. 1973. Autoimmune response to acetylcholine receptor. Science 180:871–872. Rahimov F, Kunkel LM. 2013. Cellular and molecular
- mechanisms underlying muscular dystrophy. J Cell Biol 201:499–510.
- Rosen DR, Siddique T, Patterson D, et al. 1993. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 362:59–62.
- Rowland LP, Hoefer PFA, Aranow H Jr. 1960. Myasthenic syndromes. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis 38:548–600. Taylor JP, Brown RH, Cleveland DW. 2016. Decoding ALS:
- from genes to mechanisms. Nature 539:197–206.

20/01/21 9:00 AM


Seizures and Epilepsy

Classification of Seizures and the Epilepsies Is Important for

Pathogenesis and Treatment

Seizures Are Temporary Disruptions of Brain Function

## Epilepsy Is a Chronic Condition of Recurrent Seizures

The Electroencephalogram Represents the Collective Activity of Cortical Neurons Focal Onset Seizures Originate Within a Small

## Group of Neurons Neurons in a Seizure Focus Have Abnormal

## Bursting Activity The Breakdown of Surround Inhibition Leads

to Synchronization The Spread of Seizure Activity Involves Normal

Cortical Circuitry Generalized Onset Seizures Are Driven by

Thalamocortical Circuits Locating the Seizure Focus Is Critical to the Surgical

## Treatment of Epilepsy Prolonged Seizures Can Cause Brain Damage

## Repeated Convulsive Seizures Are a Medical Emergency

## Excitotoxicity Underlies Seizure-Related Brain Damage

The Factors Leading to Development of Epilepsy Are Poorly Understood Mutations in Ion Channels Are Among the Genetic

## Causes of Epilepsy The Genesis of Acquired Epilepsies Is a Maladaptive

Response to Injury Highlights

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1447

U

ntil quite recently, the function and

organization of the human cerebral cortex—

the region of the brain concerned with percep-

tual, motor, and cognitive functions—has eluded both clinicians and neuroscientists. In the past, the analysis of brain function relied largely on observations of loss of brain functions resulting from brain damage and cell loss caused by strokes or trauma. These natural experiments provided much of the early evidence that distinct brain regions serve specific functions, or as the famous American neurologist C. Miller Fisher said, "We learn about the brain 'stroke by stroke.'" Observation of patients with seizures and epilepsy has been equally important in the study of brain function because the behavioral consequences of these disorders of neural hyperactivity inform clinicians how activation affects the brain regions from which they originate. Temporary disruptions of brain function resulting from abnormal, excessive neuronal activity are called seizures, whereas the chronic condition of repeated sei-

zures is called epilepsy. For centuries, understanding the neurological origins of seizures was confounded by the dramatic, and sometimes bizarre, behaviors associated with seizures. The chronic condition of epilepsy was widely associated with possession by evil spirits, yet seizures also were thought to be a sign of oracular, prescient, or special creative powers. The Greeks in the time of Hippocrates (circa 400 BC) were aware that head injuries to one side of the brain could cause seizure activity on the opposite side of the

body. In those earlier times, the diagnosis of epilepsy was probably much broader than the contemporary definition. Other causes of episodic unconsciousness, such as syncope as well as mass hysteria and

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

psychogenic seizures, were almost certainly attributed

to epilepsy. Moreover, historical writings typically

describe generalized convulsive seizures involving

both cerebral hemispheres; thus, it is likely that seizures involving a very limited area of the brain were misdiagnosed or never diagnosed at all. Even today, it can be difficult for physicians to distinguish between episodic loss of consciousness and the various types of seizures. Nevertheless, as our ability to treat and even cure epilepsy continues to improve, these diagnostic distinctions take on increasing significance. The early neurobiological analysis of epilepsy began with John Hughlings Jackson's work in London in the 1860s. Jackson realized that seizures need not

involve loss of consciousness but could be associated with localized symptoms such as the jerking of an arm. His observation was the first formal recognition of what we now call partial (or focal) seizures. Jackson also observed patients whose seizures began with focal neurological symptoms, then progressed to convulsions with loss of consciousness by steadily involving adjacent regions in an orderly fashion (the so-called Jacksonian march). His observations gave rise to the concept of the motor homunculus (the anatomical map representing the body organization or "wiring diagram" over the cortical surface) long before functional organization was established using electrophysiological techniques (Chapter 4). Another pioneering development that presaged modern therapy was the first surgical treatment for epilepsy in 1886 by the British neurosurgeon Victor

Horsley. Horsley resected cerebral cortex adjacent to a depressed skull fracture and cured a patient with focal motor seizures. Related medical innovations include the first use of phenobarbital as an anticonvulsant in 1912 by Alfred Hauptmann, the development of electroencephalography by Hans Berger in 1929, and the discovery of the anticonvulsant properties of phenytoin (Dilantin) by Houston Merritt and Tracey Putnam in 1937. The birth of routine surgical treatment for epilepsy dates to the early 1950s, when Wilder Penfield and Herbert Jasper in Montreal stimulated the cortex and pinpointed the motor and sensory maps before removing the epileptic focus. As in any chronic disease, the physiological features of seizures are not the only consideration in the care and management of patients with epilepsy. Psychosocial factors are also extremely important. The diagnosis of epilepsy has consequences that can affect all aspects of everyday life, including educational opportunities, driving, and employment. Although many societal limitations imposed on epileptics are appropriate—most would agree that patients with epilepsy should not be commercial

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1448

pilots—a diagnosis of epilepsy can result in inappro-

priately negative effects on educational opportunities

and employment. To improve this situation, phy-

sicians have a duty to educate themselves and the public on the underlying science of epilepsy and its major comorbidities, including cognitive problems and depression. Classification of Seizures and the Epilepsies Is

Important for Pathogenesis and Treatment

## Not all seizures are the same. Thus, the pathogenesis and classification of seizures must take into account

their clinical characteristics as well as acquired and

genetic factors in each patient. Seizures and the chronic condition of repetitive seizures (epilepsy) are common. Based on epidemiological studies in the United States, 1% to 3% of all individuals living to the age of 80 will be diagnosed with epilepsy. The highest incidence occurs in young children and the elderly. In many respects, seizures represent a prototypic neurological disease in that the symptoms include both "positive" and "negative" sensory or motor manifesta-

tions. Examples of positive signs that can occur during a seizure include the perception of flashing lights or the jerking of an arm. Negative signs reflect impairments of normal brain function such as an impairment of consciousness and cognitive awareness or even transient blindness, speech arrest, or paralysis. These examples underscore a general feature of seizures: The signs and symptoms depend on the location and extent of brain regions that are affected. Finally, the manifestations of seizures result in part from synchronous activity triggered in surrounding tissue with normal cellular and network properties. The latter activity is particularly important in the spread of a seizure beyond its original boundaries—seizures quite literally hijack the normal functions of the brain. Seizures Are Temporary Disruptions of

Brain Function

## Seizures have been classified clinically into two categories, focal or generalized, based on their onset

(Table 58–1). This classification is conceptually sim-

ple, but because several terms have been used over the years to refer to the same condition, the binary nature may have been obscured. Nonetheless, this classification of seizures has proven extremely useful to clinicians, and anticonvulsant medications are targeted to one or the other type.

18/12/20 11:39 AM

Table 58–1 International Classification of Seizures

Seizures

Focal onset

Aware versus impaired awareness

| Motor versus nonmotor onset  Focal to bilateral tonic-clonic  Generalized onset Motor Tonic-clonic (formerly grand mal)  ## Other motor  Nonmotor (absence)  Unknown onset  Motor Tonic-clonic  Other motor  Nonmotor  Unclassified  Source: Commission on Classification and Terminology of the  International League Against Epilepsy, 2017.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Focal onset (also called partial) seizures originate in a small group of neurons (the seizure focus), and

thus the symptoms depend on the location of the focus

within the brain. Focal onset seizures can occur either without alteration of consciousness (often called simple partial) or with alteration of consciousness (often called complex partial). A typical focal onset seizure might begin with jerking in the right hand and progress to clonic movements (ie, jerks) of the entire right arm. If a focal onset seizure progresses further, the patient may lose consciousness, fall to the ground, rigidly extend all extremities (tonic phase), then have convulsive jerking in all extremities (clonic phase). A focal onset seizure can be preceded by telltale symptoms called auras. Common auras include unprovoked and often vivid sensations such as a sense of

fear, a rising feeling in the abdomen, or even a specific odor. The novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky described his auras as a "feeling … so strong and sweet that for a few seconds of such bliss I would give ten or more years of my life, even my whole life perhaps." The aura is a product of electrical activity in the seizure focus and thus represents the earliest seizure manifestation. The time after a seizure but before the patient returns to his or her normal level of neurological function is called the post-ictal period. Generalized onset seizures constitute the second main category. They begin without an aura or focal onset and involve both hemispheres from the onset.

Thus, they are sometimes called primary generalized seizures to avoid confusion with seizures that

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1449

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


secondarily generalize following a focal onset. Gener-

alized onset seizures can be further divided into motor

(convulsive) or nonmotor types depending on whether

the seizure is associated with tonic-clonic movements. The prototypic nonmotor generalized onset seizure is the typical absence seizure in children (formerly called petit mal). These seizures begin abruptly, usually last

less than 10 seconds, are associated with staring and sudden cessation of all motor activity, and result in loss of awareness but not loss of posture. Patients appear as if in a trance, but the episodes are so brief that their occurrence can be missed by a casual observer. Unlike a focal onset seizure, there is no aura before the seizure or confusion after the seizure (the post-ictal period). Patients may exhibit mild motor manifestations such as eye blinking, but do not fall or have tonic-clonic movements. Typical absence seizures have very distinctive electrical characteristics on the electroencephalogram (EEG) known as a spike-and-wave pattern. Some generalized onset seizures involve only abnormal (myoclonic, clonic, or tonic) movements or a sudden loss of motor tone (atonia). The most com-

mon motor type of generalized onset seizure is the tonic-clonic (formerly called grand mal) seizure. Such seizures begin abruptly, often with a grunt or cry, as tonic contraction of the diaphragm and thorax forces expiration. During the tonic phase, the patient may fall to the ground in a rigid posture with clenched jaw, lose bladder or bowel control, and become blue (cyanotic). The tonic phase typically lasts 30 seconds before evolving into clonic jerking of the extremities lasting 1 to 2 minutes. This active phase is followed by a post-ictal phase during which the patient is sleepy, disoriented, and may complain of headache and muscle soreness. A generalized onset tonic-clonic seizure can be difficult to distinguish on purely clinical grounds from a focal seizure with a brief aura, which then rapidly

progresses to a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. This distinction is not academic, as it can be vital to pinpointing the underlying cause and choosing the proper treatment. However, some seizures are simply difficult to classify because of undetermined onset. Epilepsy Is a Chronic Condition of Recurrent Seizures

## Recurrent seizures constitute the minimal criterion for the diagnosis of epilepsy. The oft-quoted clini-

cal rule, "A single seizure does not epilepsy make,"

emphasizes this point, and even repeated seizures in response to a provocation such as alcohol withdrawal are not considered epilepsy. Various factors that contribute to a clinical pattern of recurrent seizures—the

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

underlying etiology of the seizures, the age of onset,

or family history—are ignored in the classification scheme

for seizures in Table 58–1. The classification of the epi-

lepsies evolved primarily based on clinical observation rather than a precise cellular, molecular, or genetic understanding of the disorder. The factors influencing seizure type and severity can often be recognized as patterns of signs and symptoms, referred to as epilepsy syndromes. Such factors include the age of seizure onset, whether the seizures are inherited, and certain patterns on the EEG. The recognition of these syndromes has played a role in the recent discovery of single gene mutations as a cause of seizure disorders. The primary variables in the classification of the epilepsies are whether or not a focal brain abnormality can be identified (localization-related versus general-

ized epilepsies) and whether there is an identifiable cause (symptomatic) or not (unknown, often called idiopathic). The great majority of adult-onset epilepsies are classified as symptomatic localization-related epilepsies. This category includes such causes as trauma, stroke, tumors, and infections. A large number of individuals have adult-onset epilepsies without a clearly defined cause. Unfortunately, despite the usefulness of this classification scheme, many epilepsy syndromes do not fit neatly. One expects (and hopes) that this classification

will be greatly refined as criteria include the underlying etiologies rather than just clinical phenotype. The Electroencephalogram Represents the

Collective Activity of Cortical Neurons

## Because neurons are excitable cells, it should not be surprising that seizures result directly or indirectly

from a change in the excitability of single neurons or

groups of neurons. This view dominated early experimental studies of seizures. To study such effects, electrical recordings of brain activity can be made with intracellular or extracellular electrodes. Extracellular electrodes sense action potentials in nearby neurons and can detect the synchronized activity of ensembles of cells called field potentials . At the slow time resolution of extracellular record ing (hundreds of milliseconds to seconds), field potentials can appear as single transient changes called Because the electrical activity originates in neurons in the underlying brain tissue, the waveform recorded by the surface electrode depends on the orientation and distance of the electrical source with respect to the electrode. The EEG signal is inevitably distorted by the filtering and attenuation caused by intervening layers of tissue and bone that act in the same way as resistors and capacitors in an electric circuit. Thus, the amplitude of EEG signals (measured in microvolts) is much smaller than the voltage changes in a single neuron (millivolts). High-frequency activity in single cells, such as action potentials, is filtered out by the EEG signal, which primarily reflects slower voltage changes across the cell membrane, such as synaptic potentials. Although the EEG signal is a measure of the extracellular current caused by the summated electrical activity of many neurons, not all cells contribute equally to the EEG. The surface EEG reflects predominately the activity of cortical neurons in close proximity to each of the set of EEG electrodes on the scalp. Thus, deep structures such as the base of a cortical gyrus, mesial walls of the major lobes, hippocampus, thalamus, or brain stem do not contribute directly to the surface EEG. The contributions of individual nerve cells to the EEG are discussed in Box 58–1. The surface EEG shows patterns of activity— characterized by the frequency and amplitude of the electrical activity—that correlate with various stages of sleep and wakefulness (Chapter 44) and with some pathophysiological processes such as seizures. The normal human EEG shows activity over the range of 1 to 30 Hz with amplitudes in the range of 20 to 100 μV. The observed frequencies have been divided into several groups: alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), delta (0.5–4 Hz), and theta (4–7 Hz). Alpha waves of moderate amplitude are typical of relaxed wakefulness and are most prominent over parietal and occipital sites. During intense mental activity,

-beta waves of lower amplitude are more prominent in frontal areas and over other regions. Alerting relaxed subjects by asking them to open their eyes results in socalled desynchronization of the EEG with a reduction in alpha activity and an increase in beta activity (Figure 58–1B). Theta and delta waves are normal during drowsiness and early slow-wave sleep; if they are present during wakefulness, it is a sign of brain dysfunction. As neuronal ensembles become synchronized, as when a subject relaxes or becomes drowsy, the summated currents become larger and can be seen as

abrupt changes from the baseline activity. Such "paroxysmal" activity can be normal, eg, the episodes of high-amplitude activity (1–2 seconds, 7–15 Hz) that occur during sleep (sleep spindles). However, a sharp

18/12/20 11:39 AM

spikes. These spikes reflect action potentials in many neurons and should not be confused with spikes in recordings of single neurons, which are individual action potentials that last only 1 or 2 ms. The EEG thus represents a set of field potentials as recorded by multiple electrodes on the surface of the scalp (Figure 58–1).

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1450
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

underlying etiology of the seizures, the age of onset,

or family history—are ignored in the classification scheme

for seizures in Table 58–1. The classification of the epi-

lepsies evolved primarily based on clinical observation rather than a precise cellular, molecular, or genetic understanding of the disorder. The factors influencing seizure type and severity can often be recognized as patterns of signs and symptoms, referred to as epilepsy syndromes. Such factors include the age of seizure onset, whether the seizures are inherited, and certain patterns on the EEG. The recognition of these syndromes has played a role in the recent discovery of single gene mutations as a cause of seizure disorders. The primary variables in the classification of the epilepsies are whether or not a focal brain abnormality can be identified (localization-related versus general-

ized epilepsies) and whether there is an identifiable cause (symptomatic) or not (unknown, often called idiopathic). The great majority of adult-onset epilepsies are classified as symptomatic localization-related epilepsies. This category includes such causes as trauma, stroke, tumors, and infections. A large number of individuals have adult-onset epilepsies without a clearly defined cause. Unfortunately, despite the usefulness of this classification scheme, many epilepsy syndromes do not fit neatly. One expects (and hopes) that this classification

will be greatly refined as criteria include the underlying etiologies rather than just clinical phenotype. The Electroencephalogram Represents the

Collective Activity of Cortical Neurons

## Because neurons are excitable cells, it should not be surprising that seizures result directly or indirectly

from a change in the excitability of single neurons or

groups of neurons. This view dominated early experimental studies of seizures. To study such effects, electrical recordings of brain activity can be made with intracellular or extracellular electrodes. Extracellular electrodes sense action potentials in nearby neurons and can detect the synchronized activity of ensembles of cells called field potentials . At the slow time resolution of extracellular record ing (hundreds of milliseconds to seconds), field potentials can appear as single transient changes called Because the electrical activity originates in neurons in the underlying brain tissue, the waveform recorded by the surface electrode depends on the orientation and distance of the electrical source with respect to the electrode. The EEG signal is inevitably distorted by the filtering and attenuation caused by intervening layers of tissue and bone that act in the same way as resistors and capacitors in an electric circuit. Thus, the amplitude of EEG signals (measured in microvolts) is much smaller than the voltage changes in a single neuron (millivolts). High-frequency activity in single cells, such as action potentials, is filtered out by the EEG signal, which primarily reflects slower voltage changes across the cell membrane, such as synaptic potentials. Although the EEG signal is a measure of the extracellular current caused by the summated electrical activity of many neurons, not all cells contribute equally to the EEG. The surface EEG reflects predominately the activity of cortical neurons in close proximity to each of the set of EEG electrodes on the scalp. Thus, deep structures such as the base of a cortical gyrus, mesial walls of the major lobes, hippocampus, thalamus, or brain stem do not contribute directly to the surface EEG. The contributions of individual nerve cells to the EEG are discussed in Box 58–1. The surface EEG shows patterns of activity— characterized by the frequency and amplitude of the electrical activity—that correlate with various stages of sleep and wakefulness (Chapter 44) and with some pathophysiological processes such as seizures. The normal human EEG shows activity over the range of 1 to 30 Hz with amplitudes in the range of 20 to 100 μV. The observed frequencies have been divided into several groups: alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), delta (0.5–4 Hz), and theta (4–7 Hz). Alpha waves of moderate amplitude are typical of relaxed wakefulness and are most prominent over parietal and occipital sites. During intense mental activity,

-beta waves of lower amplitude are more prominent in frontal areas and over other regions. Alerting relaxed subjects by asking them to open their eyes results in socalled desynchronization of the EEG with a reduction in alpha activity and an increase in beta activity (Figure 58–1B). Theta and delta waves are normal during drowsiness and early slow-wave sleep; if they are present during wakefulness, it is a sign of brain dysfunction. As neuronal ensembles become synchronized, as when a subject relaxes or becomes drowsy, the summated currents become larger and can be seen as

abrupt changes from the baseline activity. Such "paroxysmal" activity can be normal, eg, the episodes of high-amplitude activity (1–2 seconds, 7–15 Hz) that occur during sleep (sleep spindles). However, a sharp

18/12/20 11:39 AM

spikes. These spikes reflect action potentials in many neurons and should not be confused with spikes in recordings of single neurons, which are individual action potentials that last only 1 or 2 ms. The EEG thus represents a set of field potentials as recorded by multiple electrodes on the surface of the scalp (Figure 58–1).

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1450

A Standard electrode placement

B EEG of awake human

## 2 1







L R 12


<!-- image -->

Eyes open Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy Eyes closed

<!-- image -->

awake human subject.

A. A standard set of placements (or montage) of electrodes on

the surface of the scalp. The electrical response at each site reflects the activity between two of the electrodes.

B. At the beginning of the recording, the EEG shows low-voltage activity (~20 μV) over the surface of the scalp. The vertical lines

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1451


100 µV

the subject was resting quietly with eyes open, and then the

subject was asked to close his eyes. With the eyes closed,

larger-amplitude activity (8–10 Hz) develops over the occipital region (sites 3, 4, 8, 12, 15, and 16). This is the normal alpha rhythm characteristic of the relaxed, wakeful state. Slow largeamplitude artifacts occur at 3.5 seconds when the eyes blink and at 9 seconds when the eyes close.

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Box 58–1 The Contribution of Individual Neurons to the Electroencephalogram

## The contribution of the activity of single neurons to the electroencephalogram (EEG) can be understood by dendrite of a cortical pyramidal neuron (Figure 58–2). Ionic current enters the dendrite at the site of generation

examining a simplified cortical circuit and some basic

electrical principles. Pyramidal neurons are the major projection neurons in the cortex. The apical dendrites of these cells, which are oriented perpendicular to the cell surface, receive a variety of synaptic inputs. Thus, synaptic activity in the pyramidal cells is the principal source of EEG activity. To understand the contribution of a single neuron to the EEG, consider the flow of charge produced by an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) on the apical

Cortical

layer


<!-- image -->

of the EPSP, creating what is commonly called a current

sink. It then must complete a loop by flowing down the dendrite and back out across the membrane at other sites, creating a current source. The voltage signal created by a synaptic current is approximately predicted by Ohm's law (V = IR, where V is voltage, I is current, and R is resistance). Because the

membrane resistance (R m ) is much larger than that of the salt solution that constitutes the extracellular medium (R e ), the voltage recorded across the membrane with an

Cortical surface

Figure 58–2 The pattern of electrical cur-

rent flow for an excitatory postsynaptic

potential (EPSP) initiated at the apical

dendrite of a pyramidal neuron in the cerebral cortex. Activity is detected by three electrodes: an intracellular electrode inserted in the apical dendrite (1), an extracellular electrode positioned near the site of the EPSP in layer II of the cortex (2), and an extracellular electrode near the cell body in layer V (3). At the site of the EPSP (current sink), positive charge flows across the cell membrane (IE IEPSP ) into the cytoplasm, down the dendritic cytoplasm, and then completes the loop by exiting through the membrane near the cell body (current source). The potentials recorded by the extracellular electrodes at the sink and at the source have opposite polarity; the potentials recorded by the intracellular electrode have the same polarity regardless of the site. Rm Rm, Ra Ra , and Re Re are the resistances of the membrane, cytoplasm, and extracellular space, respectively.

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1452

+

18/12/20 11:39 AM


intracellular electrode (Vm

) is also larger than the voltage

at an extracellular electrode positioned near the current

Ve

sink (Ve

).

At the site of generation of an EPSP, the extracellular electrode detects the voltage change due to charge flowing away from the electrode into the cytoplasm as

a negative voltage deflection. However, an extracellular electrode near the current source records a signal of opposite polarity (compare electrodes 1 and 3 in Figure 58–2). The situation is reversed if the site of the EPSP generation is on the basal segment of the apical dendrites. In the cerebral cortex, excitatory axons from the contralateral hemisphere terminate primarily on Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy dendrites in layers II and III, whereas thalamocortical axons terminate in layer IV (Figure 58–2). As a result, the activity measured by a surface EEG electrode will have opposite polarities for these two inputs even though the electrical event (membrane depolarization) is the same. Similarly, the origin or polarity of cortical synaptic events cannot be unambiguously determined from surface EEG recordings alone. EPSPs in superficial layers and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) in deeper layers both appear as upward (negative) potentials, whereas EPSPs in deeper layers and IPSPs in superficial layers have downward (positive) potentials (Figure 58–3).

Activity in cortex layer 5 Activity in cortex layer 2

+

–

+

–

<!-- image -->

ity of synaptic events.  The polarity of the surface EEG

depends on the location of the synaptic activity within the cortex. A thalamocortical excitatory signal in layer V causes

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1453

Axons from

contralateral

cortex via

corpus callosum

contrast, an excitatory signal from the contralateral hemi-

sphere in layer II causes a downward deflection because the electrode is nearer the sink.


18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System



<!-- image -->

sents the electrical activity between pairs of scalp electrodes

as indicated in the electrode map. For example, electrode pairs 11–15 and 15–13 measure activity from the right temporal area. EEG activity in a patient with epilepsy shows sharp waves in the electrodes over the right temporal area (record wave or EEG spike can also provide a clue to the

location of a seizure focus in a patient with epilepsy

(Figure 58–4). New recording and analytical methods

such as spectral analysis of the EEG are increasingly being used to detect abnormal zones of synchrony (fast ripples) within a seizure focus. Focal Onset Seizures Originate Within a Small

Group of Neurons

## Despite the variety of clinically defined seizures, important insights into the generation of seizure activ-

ity can largely be understood by comparing the elec-

trographic patterns of focal onset seizures with those of generalized onset seizures. The defining feature of focal onset seizures is that the abnormal electrical activity originates from a seizure focus. The seizure focus is considered to be nothing

more than a small group of neurons, perhaps 1,000 or so, that have enhanced excitability and the ability to occasionally spread that activity to neighboring regions and thereby cause a seizure. The enhanced excitability (epileptiform activity) may result from many different

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1454

50 µv

enclosed in boxes). Such paroxysmal activity arises suddenly

and disrupts the normal background EEG pattern. The focal

abnormality may indicate that the seizure focus in this patient

is in the right temporal lobe. Because the patient had no clinical seizures during the recording, these are interictal spikes (see Figure 58-7). (Adapted, with permission, from Lothman and Collins 1990.) factors such as altered cellular properties, glial dysfunc-

tion, or altered synaptic connections caused by a local

scar, blood clot, or tumor. The development of a focal

onset seizure can be arbitrarily divided into four phases: (1) the interictal period between seizures followed by (2) synchronization of activity within the seizure focus, (3) seizure spread, and finally, (4) secondary generalization. Phases 2 to 4 represent the ictal phase of the seizure. Different factors contribute to each phase. Much of our knowledge about the electrical events during seizures comes from studies of animal models of focal onset seizures. A seizure is induced in an ani -

mal by focal electrical stimulation or by acute injection of a convulsant agent. This approach along with in vitro studies of tissue from these animal models has provided a good understanding of electrical events within the focus during a seizure as well as during the onset of the interictal period. Neurons in a Seizure Focus Have Abnormal Bursting Activity

## How does electrical activity in a single neuron or group of neurons lead to a focal onset seizure? Each neuron

18/12/20 11:39 AM

within a seizure focus has a stereotypic and synchro-

nized electrical response, the paroxysmal depolarizing

shift, a depolarization that is sudden, large (20–40 mV), Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


the paroxysmal depolarizing shift can be viewed as

a massive enhancement of these depolarizing and

hyperpolarizing synaptic components. The afterhy-

and long-lasting (50–200 ms), and that triggers a train of action potentials at its peak. The paroxysmal depolarizing shift is followed by an afterhyperpolarization (Figure 58–5A). The paroxysmal depolarizing shift and afterhyperpolarization are shaped by the intrinsic membrane properties of the neuron (eg, voltage-gated Na

K + , and Ca 2+ channels) and by synaptic inputs from excitatory and inhibitory neurons (primarily glutamatergic and GABAergic, respectively). The depolarizing phase results primarily from activation of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)- and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)type glutamate receptor-channels (Figure 58–5A), as well as voltage-gated Na + and Ca 2+ channels. NMDAtype receptor-channels are particularly effective in enhancing excitability because depolarization relieves Mg 2+ blockage of the channel. Removal of the blockage increases current through the channel, thus enhancing the depolarization and allowing additional Ca enter the neuron (Chapter 13). The normal response of a cortical pyramidal neuron to excitatory input consists of an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) followed by an inhibitory

+ , perpolarization is generated by voltage-dependent and Ca 2+ -dependent K + channels as well as by a γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated Cl – conduct -ance (ionotropic GABA A A receptors) and K + conductance (metabotropic GABA B receptors) (Figure 58–5A). The Ca 2+ influx through voltage-dependent Ca 2+ channels and NMDA-type receptor-channels triggers the opening of calcium-activated channels, particularly K + channels. The afterhyperpolarization limits the duration of the paroxysmal depolarizing shift, and its gradual disappearance is the most important factor in the onset of a focal onset seizure, as discussed later. Thus, it is not surprising that many convulsants act by enhancing excitation or blocking inhibition. Conversely, anticonvulsants can act by blocking

2+ to excitation or enhancing inhibition. For example, the benzodiazepines diazepam (Valium) and lorazepam (Ativan) enhance GABA A -mediated inhibition and are used in the emergency treatment of prolonged repetitive seizures. The anticonvulsants phenytoin (Dilantin) and carbamazepine (Tegretol) and several others reduce the opening of voltage-gated Na + channels that under -lie the action potential. Molecular models of the Na + channel indicate that these drugs are more effective when the channel is in the open or activated state.

B Basic cortical circuit

postsynaptic potential (IPSP) (Figure 58–5B). Thus,

A Interictal PDS within seizure focus


<!-- image -->

A. The paroxysmal depolarizing shift (PDS) is largely depend-

ent on α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)- and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate

receptor-channels whose effectiveness is enhanced by the opening of voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels (g Ca ). Following the depolarization, the cell is hyperpolarized by activation of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors (both ionotropic GABA

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1455

from Lothman 1993a.)

+

<!-- image -->

B. Recurrent axon branches activate inhibitory neurons and cause feedback inhibition of the pyramidal neuron. Extrinsic excitatory inputs can also activate feedforward inhibition. The PDS

A represents exaggerated excitation in a seizure focus, whereas the inhibitory circuitry forms the basis of surround inhibition, important in restricting interictal activity to the seizure focus.

18/12/20 11:39 AM

Feedback

inhibition

+

) as well as by voltage-gated and

). (Adapted, with permission,


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Thus, fittingly, the ability of these drugs to block Na

+

channels is enhanced by repetitive activity associated

with seizures; that is, the greatest effect is in those neu-

rons that need to be silenced the most. The Breakdown of Surround Inhibition Leads to

Synchronization

## As long as the abnormal electrical activity is restricted to a small group of neurons, there are no clinical mani-

festations. The synchronization of neurons in a seizure

focus is dependent not only on the intrinsic properties of each individual cell but also on the number and strength of connections between neurons. During the A

Figure 58–6 The spatial and tempo-

ral organization of a seizure focus

depends on the interplay between

excitation and inhibition of neurons in

the focus. A. The pyramidal cell a shows the typical electrical properties of neurons in a seizure focus (see part B). Excitation

in cell a activates another pyramidal cell (b), and when many such cells fire synchronously, a spike is recorded on the electroencephalogram. However, cell a also activates γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic inhibitory interneurons (gray). These interneurons can reduce the activity of cells a and b through feedback inhibition, thus limiting the seizure focus temporally, as well as prevent the firing of cells outside the focus, represented here by cell c. This latter phenomenon creates an inhibitory surround that acts to contain the hyperexcitability to the seizure focus during interictal periods. When extrinsic or intrinsic factors alter this balance of excitation and inhibition, the inhibitory surround begins to break down and the seizure activity spreads, leading to seizure generation. (Adapted, with permission, from Lothman and Collins 1990.) B. The synaptic connections and activity patterns for cells a , b, and c shown in part A. Cells a and b (within the seizure

focus) undergo a paroxysmal depolarizing shift, whereas cell c (in the inhibitory surround) is hyperpolarized due to input from GABAergic inhibitory interneurons.

interictal period, the abnormal activity is confined

to the seizure focus by inhibition of the surrounding

tissue.

This "inhibitory surround," initially described by David Prince, is particularly dependent on feedforward and feedback inhibition by GABAergic inhibi-

tory interneurons (Figure 58–6A). Although inhibitory circuits in the cerebral cortex are often represented by simple diagrams (Figure 58–6B), the morphology and connectivity of cortical inhibitory neurons are actually quite complex and a topic of continuing investigation with many new methods such as cell type–specific viral labeling and optogenetic stimulation. During the development of a focal seizure, the excitation in the circuit overcomes the inhibitory

Inhibitory surround

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1456

18/12/20 11:39 AM

Figure 58–7 A focal onset seizure

begins with the loss of the afterhy-

perpolarization and surround inhibi-

tion. (Adapted, with permission, from Lothman 1993a.) A. With the onset of a seizure (arrow), neurons in the seizure focus depolarize as in the first phase of a paroxysmal

depolarizing shift. However, unlike the interictal period, the depolarization persists for seconds or minutes. The γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated inhibition fails, whereas excitatory activity in the α-amino-3-hydroxy5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)- and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors is functionally enhanced. This activity corresponds to the tonic phase of a secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizure. As the GABA-mediated inhibition gradually returns, the neurons in the seizure focus enter a period of oscillation corresponding to the clonic phase. B. As the surround inhibition breaks down, neurons in the seizure focus become synchronously excited and

send trains of action potentials to distant neurons, thus spreading the abnormal activity from the focus. Compare this pattern of activity in cells a to c with that during the interictal period (Figure 58–6B).

–



<!-- image -->

surround, and the afterhyperpolarization in the neu-

rons of the original focus gradually disappears. As

a result, a nearly continuous high-frequency train of

action potentials is generated, and the seizure begins to spread beyond the original focus (Figure 58–7). An important factor in the spread of focal onset seizures appears to be that the intense firing of the pyramidal neurons results in a relative decrease in synaptic

transmission from the inhibitory GABAergic interneurons, although the interneurons remain viable. Whether this decrease results from a presynaptic change in the release of GABA or a postsynaptic change in GABA receptors is still not understood and may not be the same in all cases. Other factors that may contribute to the loss of the inhibitory surround over time include changes in dendritic morphology, the density of receptors or channels, or a depolarizing shift in E K by extracellular K + ion accumulation. Prolonged firing also transmits action potentials to distant sites in the brain, which in turn may trigger trains of action potentials in neurons that project back to neurons in the seizure focus (backpropagation). Reciprocal connections

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1457

between the neocortex and thalamus may be particu-

larly important in this regard.

Despite our understanding of such mechanisms,

we still do not know what causes a seizure to occur at any particular moment. The inability to predict

when a seizure will occur is perhaps the most debilitating aspect of epilepsy. New approaches to this dilemma are discussed in Box 58–2. Some patients learn to recognize the triggers most critical for them, such as sleep deprivation or stress, and thus adjust their lifestyle to avoid these circumstances. But in many individuals, seizures do not follow a predictable pattern. In a few patients, sensory stimuli such as flashing lights can trigger seizures, suggesting that repeated excitation of some circuits causes a change in excit-

caused ability. For example, NMDA-type glutamate receptor activity and GABAergic inhibition can undergo changes dependent on the frequency of firing of the presynaptic neuron. This provides one possible molecular mechanism for such changes in network excitability. On a longer time scale, circadian rhythms and hormonal patterns may also influence the likelihood

18/12/20 11:39 AM

A

Tonic phase Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy Clonic phase



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Box 58–2 New Approaches to Real-Time Seizure Detection and Prevention

## Perhaps the most disabling aspect of seizures and epilepsy is the uncertainty of it all—when will the next surface EEG electrodes or implanted electrodes. Several technologies are now emerging that allow new hope for

seizure occur? As you can imagine, this impacts employ-

ment, driving, and recreation and often prevents the development of an individual's full potential. Patients with epilepsy sometimes have a brief warning or aura, but rarely do they have enough time to institute a therapeutic intervention such as a pill or an injection in order to abort the seizure. Clinicians and epilepsy researchers have long recognized the importance of real-time seizure detection and real-time seizure prevention as a goal of therapy. Of

course, acute detection must precede an acute treatment. However, in general, this approach has only been possible in patients undergoing EEG monitoring either with

Figure 58–8 Vagal nerve stimulation. Schematic of place-

ment of electrodes on the left vagus nerve powered by a detection, and thus enable efforts to abort or prevent an imminent seizure. Most are still in the experimental phase in animal models, but a few have reached clinical trials and even, in the case of vagal nerve stimulators, clinical practice. Seizure prevention can be imagined in two general ways: either altering the excitability of large regions of brain or somehow interrupting activity within a seizure focus. These two approaches can also be considered in engineering terms as open-loop or closedloop strategies, respectively. The first approach led to the development in 1997 of the vagal nerve stimulator, implanted in the neck and powered by a pacemaker-style battery (Figure 58–8). The stimulation can be programmed at regular intervals (eg, every

30 seconds) and can also be activated on demand by placing a

<!-- image -->

battery implanted subcutaneously in the chest wall. The

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1458

magnet over the chest. (Adapted from Stacey and Litt 2008.)

18/12/20 11:39 AM

resulting chronic, intermittent stimulation of the vagus

nerve has been effective in reducing seizure frequency

in some patients. The patient can also activate the stimu-

lator with a hand-held magnet during an aura to see if acute stimulation can prevent a seizure. The exact mechanism of seizure reduction by vagal nerve stimulation is still unclear, but presumably involves activation of the autonomic nervous system, and thus, this form of stimulation has limited specificity to particular brain regions. Because many patients with intractable epilepsy have seizures that originate from one or more discrete foci in the brain, it would obviously be ideal to be able to

detect abnormal activity within a seizure focus, and thus through some sort of feedback mechanism deliver a stimulus that would abort the spread of epileptiform activity from that focus. This goal has been an active area of investigation over the past decade, leading to a clinical trial the results of which were recently published. The device tested was a chronically implanted neurostimulator (RNS System, Neuropace) that directly stimulates the seizure focus when epileptiform activity is detected (Figure 58–9). In this multicenter double-blinded trial, the device was implanted in patients with intractable focal onset seizures with one or two seizure foci. The patients were

monitored for an average of 5 years. The device can be programmed by the clinician to match characteristics for each patient. The patients were randomized into two groups, responsive stimulation or sham stimulation groups, for the first 5 months, and then followed for up to 2 years. There was a 44% reduction in seizure frequency after 1 year and a 53% reduction after 2 years, suggestive of a progressive effect. The device was generally well tolerated. Thus, this approach has therapeutic potential for some patients and provides proof-of-concept evidence for closed-loop seizure detection and stimulation. The RNS System uses electrical stimulation, but other strategies being studied in animals promise to refine methods of seizure prevention. These include

neuronal stimulation or silencing using viral-mediated delivery of opto- or chemogenetic probes. In general, a replication-defective virus can be targeted to a specific cell type within a brain region. In the optogenetic approach, the virus is engineered to express ion channels or pumps that reduce neuron excitability when

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1459

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy

Neurostimulator

<!-- image -->

System shows the intracranial strip and depth electrodes

that detect seizure activity and subsequently deliver programmed stimulation to the seizure focus. (Adapted, with permission, from Heck et al. 2014.)

exposed to light. In the chemogenetic approach, a chem-

ical is delivered systemically. This strategy has now been

successfully employed in animal models of epilepsy.

The optogenetic strategy is similar to the neurostimulator except that stimulation is delivered through a fiber optic light guide implanted near the seizure focus.

The advantage of this approach is that the virus is engineered to deliver stimulation to a specific population of neurons. The chemogenetic approach has the advantage of noninvasive delivery of the chemical, but lacks the speed that can be achieved with optical or electrical stimulation. Even when optimized and tested in clinical trials, these invasive approaches are likely to be useful only in a subset of focal onset epilepsies that have stable and well-defined seizure foci. Thus, continuing and complementary efforts to understand the genetic mechanisms of epileptogenesis, as well as new technologies such as stem cell therapies, remain essential.


18/12/20 11:39 AM
resulting chronic, intermittent stimulation of the vagus

nerve has been effective in reducing seizure frequency

in some patients. The patient can also activate the stimu-

lator with a hand-held magnet during an aura to see if acute stimulation can prevent a seizure. The exact mechanism of seizure reduction by vagal nerve stimulation is still unclear, but presumably involves activation of the autonomic nervous system, and thus, this form of stimulation has limited specificity to particular brain regions. Because many patients with intractable epilepsy have seizures that originate from one or more discrete foci in the brain, it would obviously be ideal to be able to

detect abnormal activity within a seizure focus, and thus through some sort of feedback mechanism deliver a stimulus that would abort the spread of epileptiform activity from that focus. This goal has been an active area of investigation over the past decade, leading to a clinical trial the results of which were recently published. The device tested was a chronically implanted neurostimulator (RNS System, Neuropace) that directly stimulates the seizure focus when epileptiform activity is detected (Figure 58–9). In this multicenter double-blinded trial, the device was implanted in patients with intractable focal onset seizures with one or two seizure foci. The patients were

monitored for an average of 5 years. The device can be programmed by the clinician to match characteristics for each patient. The patients were randomized into two groups, responsive stimulation or sham stimulation groups, for the first 5 months, and then followed for up to 2 years. There was a 44% reduction in seizure frequency after 1 year and a 53% reduction after 2 years, suggestive of a progressive effect. The device was generally well tolerated. Thus, this approach has therapeutic potential for some patients and provides proof-of-concept evidence for closed-loop seizure detection and stimulation. The RNS System uses electrical stimulation, but other strategies being studied in animals promise to refine methods of seizure prevention. These include

neuronal stimulation or silencing using viral-mediated delivery of opto- or chemogenetic probes. In general, a replication-defective virus can be targeted to a specific cell type within a brain region. In the optogenetic approach, the virus is engineered to express ion channels or pumps that reduce neuron excitability when

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1459

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy

Neurostimulator

<!-- image -->

System shows the intracranial strip and depth electrodes

that detect seizure activity and subsequently deliver programmed stimulation to the seizure focus. (Adapted, with permission, from Heck et al. 2014.)

exposed to light. In the chemogenetic approach, a chem-

ical is delivered systemically. This strategy has now been

successfully employed in animal models of epilepsy.

The optogenetic strategy is similar to the neurostimulator except that stimulation is delivered through a fiber optic light guide implanted near the seizure focus.

The advantage of this approach is that the virus is engineered to deliver stimulation to a specific population of neurons. The chemogenetic approach has the advantage of noninvasive delivery of the chemical, but lacks the speed that can be achieved with optical or electrical stimulation. Even when optimized and tested in clinical trials, these invasive approaches are likely to be useful only in a subset of focal onset epilepsies that have stable and well-defined seizure foci. Thus, continuing and complementary efforts to understand the genetic mechanisms of epileptogenesis, as well as new technologies such as stem cell therapies, remain essential.


18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

of seizures, as demonstrated by patients who have

seizures only while sleeping (nocturnal epilepsy) or

during their menstrual period (catamenial epilepsy).

If we could develop continuous monitoring methods to predict the timing of seizure generation (Box 58–2), acute intervention to deliver a drug or change neural activity patterns to prevent seizures might become a therapeutic option. However, EEG studies reveal great variability between patients in pre-ictal patterns. Continuous chronic stimulation of neural circuits is another method of modifying the excitability of epileptic circuits. As an example of this approach, implanted vagal nerve stimulators have been modestly successful in treating pharmaco-resistant epilepsy that does not respond to other treatments. The Spread of Seizure Activity Involves Normal Cortical Circuitry

## If activity in the seizure focus is sufficiently intense, the electrical activity begins to spread to other brain regions. Spread of seizure activity from a focus gener-

ally follows the same axonal pathways as does normal cortical activity. Thus, thalamocortical, subcortical, and transcallosal pathways can all become involved in seizure spread. Seizure activity can propagate from a seizure focus to other areas of the same hemisphere or across the corpus callosum to involve the contralateral hemisphere (Figure 58–10). Once both hemispheres become involved, a focal onset seizure has become secondarily generalized. At this point, the patient generally experiences loss of consciousness. The spread of a partial seizure usually occurs rapidly over a few seconds, but can also evolve over many minutes. Rapid generalization is more likely if a focal onset seizure begins in the neocortex than if it begins in the limbic system (in particular, the hippocampus and amygdala). An interesting unanswered question is what terminates a seizure. Remarkably, few mechanisms for the self-limiting return to the interictal state have been

defined with certainty. One definite conclusion at this point is that termination is not due to cellular metabolic exhaustion, because under severe conditions clinical seizures may continue for hours (see below). During the initial 30 seconds or so of a focal onset seizure that secondarily generalizes, neurons in the involved areas undergo prolonged depolarization and fire continuously (due to loss of the afterhyperpolarization that normally follows a paroxysmal depolarizing shift). As the seizure evolves, the neurons begin to repolarize and the afterhyperpolarization reappears. The cycles of depolarization and repolarization correspond to the clonic phase of the seizure (Figure 58–7A).

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1460

A Focal seizure Spread

Seizure Seizure focus

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 58–10 Focal and generalized onset seizures propa-

<!-- image -->

gate via several pathways. (Adapted, with permission, from

Lothman 1993b.)

A. Focal onset seizures can spread locally from a focus via intrahemispheric fibers (1) and more remotely to homotopic contralateral cortex (2) and subcortical centers (3). The second

-

ary generalization of a focal onset seizure spreads to subcortical centers via projections to the thalamus (4). Widespread thalamocortical interconnections then contribute to rapid activation of both hemispheres. B. In a generalized onset seizure, such as a typical absence seizure, interconnections between the thalamus and cortex are a major route of seizure propagation.

18/12/20 11:39 AM

The seizure is often followed by a period of

decreased electrical activity, the postictal period,

which may be accompanied by symptoms of confu-

sion, drowsiness, or even focal neurological deficits such as a hemiparesis (Todd paralysis). A neurological exam in the postictal period can lead to insights about the locus of the seizure focus when there is prolonged depression of one brain region or function, once other brain regions have regained normal function. Generalized Onset Seizures Are Driven by

Thalamocortical Circuits

## Unlike the typical focal onset seizure, a generalized onset seizure abruptly disrupts normal brain activity in

both cerebral hemispheres simultaneously. Generalized

onset seizures and their associated epilepsies vary both in their manifestations and etiologies. Although the cellular mechanisms of generalized onset seizures differ in a number of interesting respects from those of focal onset or secondarily generalized seizures, a generalized onset seizure can be difficult to distinguish clinically or by EEG from a focal onset seizure that rapidly generalizes. The most studied type of generalized onset seizure is the typical absence seizure (petit mal), whose characteristic EEG pattern (the 3-Hz spike-and-wave pat-

tern in Figure 58–11A) was first recognized by Hans Berger in 1933. F. A. Gibbs recognized the relationship of this EEG pattern to typical absence seizures (he aptly described the pattern as "dart and dome") and attributed the mechanism to generalized cortical disturbance. The distinctive clinical features of typical absence seizures have a clear correlation with the EEG activity. The typical absence seizure begins suddenly, lasts 10 to 30 seconds, and produces impaired awareness with only minor motor manifestations such as blink-

ing or lip smacking. Unlike a focal onset seizure that secondarily generalizes, generalized onset seizures are not preceded by an aura or followed by postictal symptoms. The spike-wave EEG pattern can be seen in all cerebral areas abruptly and simultaneously and is immediately preceded and followed by normal background activity. Very brief (1–5 seconds) runs of 3-Hz EEG activity without apparent clinical symptoms are common in patients with absence seizures, but if frequent, they can affect their ability to carry out normal activities such as school performance. In contrast to Gibbs's hypothesis of diffuse cortical hyperexcitability, Penfield and Jasper noted that the EEG in typical absence seizures is similar to rhythmic EEG

activity in sleep, so-called sleep spindles (Chapter 44). They proposed a "centrencephalic" hypothesis in which

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1461

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


generalization was attributed to rhythmic activity (pac-

ing) by neuronal aggregates in the upper brain stem or

thalamus that project diffusely to the cortex.

Research on animal models of generalized onset seizures and studies of the genetics of generalized epilepsy suggest that elements of both hypotheses

are correct. In cats, parenteral injections of penicillin, a weak GABA A A antagonist, produce behavioral unresponsiveness associated with an EEG pattern of bilateral synchronous slow waves (generalized penicillin epilepsy). During such a seizure, thalamic and cortical cells become synchronized through the same reciprocal thalamocortical connections that contribute to nor -mal sleep spindles during slow-wave sleep. Such seizures could in theory represent a form of diffuse hyperexcitability in the cortex. Recordings from individual cortical neurons show an increase in the

rate of firing during a depolarizing burst that in turn produces a powerful GABAergic inhibitory feedback that hyperpolarizes the cell for approximately 200 ms after each burst (Figure 58–11C). This depolarization followed by inhibition differs fundamentally from the paroxysmal depolarizing shift in focal onset seizures in that GABAergic inhibition is preserved. In the typical absence seizure, the summated activity of the bursts produces the spike while the summated inhibition produces the wave of the spike-wave EEG pattern. What are the properties of cells and networks that facilitate this generalized and synchronous activity? An early clue came from studies of the intrinsic

bursting of thalamic relay neurons. Henrik Jahnsen and Rodolfo Llinas found that these neurons robustly express the T-type voltage-gated Ca 2+ channel that is inactivated at the resting membrane potential but becomes available for activation when the cell is hyperpolarized (Chapter 10). A subsequent depolarization then transiently opens the Ca 2+ channel (thus its name, T-type), and the Ca 2+ influx generates low-threshold Ca 2+ spikes. Consistent with the hypothesis that T-type channels contribute to absence seizures, certain anticonvulsant agents that block absence seizures, such as ethosuximide (Zarontin) and valproic acid (Depakote), also block T-type channels. T-type channels are encoded by three related genes (Cav3.1–Cav3.3), with Cav3.1 the predominant type in the thalamus. The circuitry of the thalamus seems ideally suited to the generation of generalized onset seizures. The pattern of thalamic neuron activity during sleep spin-

dles suggests a reciprocal interaction between thalamic relay neurons and GABAergic interneurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus and perigeniculate nucleus (Figure 58–11B). Studies of thalamic brain slices by David McCormick and his colleagues indicate that

18/12/20 11:39 AM

A Spike and wave activity in typical absence seizure Vm

<!-- image -->


<!-- image -->

A. This EEG from a 12-year-old patient with typical absence

(petit mal) seizures shows the sudden onset of synchronous spikes at a frequency of 3 per second and wave activity lasting

approximately 14 seconds. The seizure clinically manifested as a staring spell with occasional eye blinks. Unlike a focal onset seizure, there is no buildup of activity preceding the seizure and the electrical activity returns abruptly to the normal background level following the seizure. The discontinuity in the trace is due to removal of a 3-second period of recording. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lothman and Collins 1990.) B. Thalamocortical connections that participate in the generation of sleep spindles (Chapter 44) are thought to be essential for the generation of generalized onset seizures. Pyramidal

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1462


interneurons in the reticular thalamic nucleus are excited by

pyramidal cells in the cortex and by thalamic relay neurons and inhibit the thalamic relay cells. The interneurons are also reciprocally connected. C. Neuronal activity of cortical and thalamic neurons becomes synchronized during a generalized onset seizure. The depolarization is dependent on conductances in α-amino-3-hydroxy-

5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)-type glutamate receptor-channels and T-type voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels. The repolarization is due to γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated inhibition as well as voltage- and calcium-dependent K + conductances (g K ). (Adapted, with permission, from Lothman 1993a.)


50 µV

18/12/20 11:39 AM

the interneurons hyperpolarize the relay neurons, thus

removing the inactivation of T-type Ca

2+

channels. This

action leads to an oscillatory response: A rebound burst Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


mapping of seizure foci. This technique is now routine

in the evaluation of epilepsies involving the temporal

lobe, but also shows increasing promise for identify-

of action potentials following each IPSP to which the T-type Ca 2+ channels contribute stimulates the GABAer gic interneurons, resulting in another round of relay neuron rebound firing. The relay neurons also excite cortical neurons, manifested in the EEG by a "spindle." Both the T-type Ca 2+ channel and the GABA B receptor-channel play an important role in the generation of this activity, which resembles human absence seizures (Chapter 44). Mutations in voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels have produced several mouse models of generalized epilepsy, including the so-called totterer mouse, which bears a

mutation in the P/Q-type calcium channels involved in neurotransmitter release. Studies of these mutants by Jeffrey Noebels and his colleagues have revealed that the animals develop generalized onset seizures when they reach adolescence. EEGs in these animals show a paroxysmal spike-wave discharge and seizures that are characterized by an arrest of behavior and blockade by ethosuximide, similar to typical absence seizures in children. Thalamic neurons in these mice have elevated T-type Ca 2+ channels that favor rebound bursting. Mutations of over 20 different genes for this phenotype have now been described in mice. Remarkably, many encode ion channel subunits or proteins involved in presynaptic transmitter release. Locating the Seizure Focus Is Critical to the

-ing seizure foci in other locations. The scientific basis of anatomical mapping of seizure foci by MRI was the observation that a majority of patients with intractable focal onset seizures with impaired awareness have atrophy and cell loss in the mesial portions of the hippocampal formation. There is a dramatic loss of neurons within the hippocampus (mesial temporal sclerosis), changes in dendritic morphology of surviving cells, and collateral sprouting of some axons. The anatomical resolution of modern MRI machines has allowed a noninvasive, quantitative assessment of the size of the hippocampus in epilepsy patients. Loss of volume of the hippocampus on one or another side of the brain generally correlates well with the localization of seizure foci in the hippocampus as determined by functional criteria using implanted depth electrodes. The typical patient with mesial temporal epilepsy has unilateral disease, which leads to shrinkage of the hippocampus on one side that can be associated with

apparent dilatation of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle. Such a case is illustrated in Box 58–3. How -ever, in many patients, abnormalities cannot be detected using anatomical MRI; thus, nonanatomical (functional) imaging techniques (fMRI) are used as well (Chapter 6). Functional neuroimaging takes advantage of the changes in cerebral metabolism and blood flow that occur in the seizure focus during the ictal and interic-

Surgical Treatment of Epilepsy

## The pioneering studies of Wilder Penfield in Montreal in the early 1950s led to the recognition that removal

of the temporal lobe in certain patients with focal

onset seizures of hippocampal origin could reduce the number of seizures or even cure epilepsy. As surgical treatment for such patients became more common, it became clear that the surgical outcome is directly related to the adequacy of the resection. Thus, precise localization of the seizure focus in cases of focal onset seizures is essential. Electrical mapping of seizure foci originally relied on the surface EEG, which we have seen is biased toward particular sets of neurons in the cortex immediately adjacent to the skull. However, seizures intractable to conventional medical management often begin in deep structures that show little or no abnormality on the surface EEG at the onset of the seizure. Thus, the surface EEG is somewhat limited in identifying the location of the seizure focus. The development of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) markedly improved the noninvasive anatomical

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1463

tal periods. The electrical activity associated with a seizure places a large metabolic demand on brain tissue. During a focal onset seizure, there is an approximately three-fold increase in glucose and oxygen utilization. Between seizures, the seizure focus often shows decreased metabolism. Despite the increased metabolic demands, the brain is able to maintain normal adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels during a focal onset seizure. On the other hand, the transient interruption of breathing during a generalized motor seizure causes a decrease in oxygen levels in the blood. This results in a drop in ATP concentration and an increase in anaerobic metabolism as indicated by rising lactate levels. This oxygen debt is quickly replenished in the postictal period, and no permanent damage to brain tissue results from a single generalized seizure. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans of patients with focal onset seizures originating in the mesial temporal lobe frequently show interictal hypo-

metabolism, with metabolic changes extending to the lateral temporal lobe, ipsilateral thalamus, basal ganglia, and frontal cortex. PET scans using nonhydrolyzable glucose analogs have been particularly helpful

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Box 58–3 Surgical Treatment of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy

## A 27-year-old woman had episodes of decreased responsiveness beginning at age 19. At first, she would stare

off and appear confused during the episodes. Later, she

developed an aura consisting of a feeling of fear. This fear was followed by altered consciousness, a wide-eyed stare, tightening of the left arm, and a scream that lasted for 14 to 20 seconds (Figure 58–12). These spells were diagnosed as complex partial seizures. The seizures occurred several times a week despite


treatment with several antiepileptic drugs. She was una-

ble to work or drive due to frequent seizures. She had a

history of meningitis at age 6 months, and throughout

childhood she had experienced brief episodes of altered perception described as "like someone threw a switch." Based on an evaluation summarized in Figures 58–13 and 58–14, a right amygdalohippocampectomy was performed. The patient was seizure-free following

the operation and returned to full-time employment.


<!-- image -->

period when she reported a feeling of fear (B), and

in identifying seizure foci in patients with normal MRI

scans and in some early childhood epilepsies. Unfortu-

nately, for unclear reasons, PET has been less reliable in

localizing seizure foci in extratemporal areas such as the frontal lobe. An additional limitation is the expense of the PET scan and the short half-life of the isotopes (a nearby cyclotron is required). PET scanning can also be used to look for functional changes in neurotransmitter receptor binding and transport related to seizure activity. A related technique that measures cerebral blood flow, single-photon emission computed tomography

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1464

with permission, from Dr. Martin Salinsky.)

(SPECT), has been used more frequently than PET.

SPECT does not have the resolution of PET but can be

performed in the nuclear medicine department of many

large hospitals. Injection of radioisotopes and SPECT imaging at the time of a seizure (ictal SPECT) reveal a pattern of hypermetabolism followed by hypometabolism in the seizure focus and surrounding tissue. Magnetoencephalography and functional MRI also offer further advantages in the mapping of seizure foci. With rigorous selection of patients for epilepsy surgery, the cure rate for epilepsy with a well-defined

18/12/20 11:39 AM





<!-- image -->

background rhythms occur in the beginning (left). At the

point when the patient reported fear (B), there is a buildup of EEG activity at the onset of a focal onset seizure with impaired awareness, but this activity is confined to the

Figure 58–14 Enhanced mag-

netic resonance imaging reveals

atrophy of the right hippocam-

pus (arrows on the right) and a normal left hippocampus (arrows on the left). (Reproduced, with permission, from Dr. Martin Salinsky.)

<!-- image -->

seizure focus in the temporal lobe can approach 80%.

Patients with complicating factors (eg, multiple foci)

have lower success rates. However, even among these

patients, the number and severity of seizures are usually reduced. Patients who have been "cured" of seizures may still experience cognitive problems such as memory loss and social problems such as adjustments to more independent living and limited employment opportunities. These factors emphasize the need for treatment as early in life as feasible.

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1465

Prolonged Seizures Can Cause Brain Damage

## Repeated Convulsive Seizures Are a Medical Emergency

## As noted above, brain tissue can compensate for the metabolic stress of a focal onset seizure or the tran -

sient decrease in oxygen delivery during a single gen-

eralized tonic-clonic seizure. In a generalized seizure, stimulation of the hypothalamus leads to massive

18/12/20 11:39 AM


EEG electrodes over the right hemisphere (electrodes

9–16). At the point awareness is altered (C), the seizure

activity has spread to the left hemisphere (electrodes 1–8).

EEG spike-waves are particularly prominent in lead 9 over the right anterior temporal region. (Reproduced, with permission, from Dr. Martin Salinsky.)

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

activation of the "stress" response of the sympathetic

nervous system. The increased systemic blood pressure

and serum glucose initially compensate for increased

metabolic demand, but these homeostatic mechanisms fail during prolonged seizures. The resulting systemic metabolic derangements, including hypoxia, hypotension, hypoglycemia, and acidemia, lead to a reduction in high-energy phosphates (ATP and phosphocreatine) in the brain and thus can be devastating to brain tissue. Systemic complications such as cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary edema, hyperthermia, and muscle breakdown can also occur. The occurrence of repeated

generalized seizures without return to full consciousness between seizures, called status epilepticus, is a true medical emergency. This condition requires aggressive seizure management and general medical support because 30 or more minutes of continuous convulsive seizures leads to brain injury or even death. Status epilepticus can involve nonconvulsive seizures for which the metabolic consequences are much less severe. In addition to the dangers of status epilepticus, patients with poorly controlled seizures are also at risk for sudden death (sudden unexpected death in epi-

lepsy [SUDEP]), the leading cause of death in patients with uncontrolled seizures. The underlying mechanisms for SUDEP are not completely understood, but recent studies by Richard Bagnall and colleagues as well as others suggest that cases of SUDEP have clinically relevant mutations in the genes implicated in cardiac arrhythmia and epilepsy. Such data support an association between SUDEP and cardiac arrhythmias or interruption of brain stem circuits involved in respiratory control. This topic is appropriately the focus of intense current investigation. Excitotoxicity Underlies Seizure-Related Brain Damage

## Repeated seizures can damage the brain independently of cardiopulmonary or systemic metabolic changes,

suggesting that local factors in the brain can result in

neuronal death. The immature brain appears particularly vulnerable to such damage, perhaps because of greater electrotonic coupling between neurons in the developing brain, less effective potassium buffering by immature glia, and decreased glucose transport across the blood–brain barrier. In 1880, Wilhelm Sommer first noted the vulner ability of the hippocampus to such insults, with preferential loss of the pyramidal neurons in the CA1 and the hippocampus or by injection of excitatory amino acid analogs such as kainic acid. Interestingly, kainic acid causes local damage at the site of injection and also at the site of termination of afferents originating at the injection site. These observations suggest that release of the excitatory transmitter glutamate during excessive stimulation such as a seizure can itself cause neuronal damage, a condition termed excitotoxicity. Because it has been difficult to detect increases in extracellular glutamate during status epilepticus, it appears that excitotoxicity results more from excessive stimulation of glutamate receptors than from tonic increases in extracellular glutamate. The histological appearance of acute excitotoxicity includes massive swelling of cell bodies and dendrites, the predominant locations of glutamate receptors and excitatory synapses. Although the cellular and molecular mechanisms of excitotoxicity are still not fully understood, several features are clear. Overactivation of glutamate recep-

2+

tors leads to an excessive increase in intracellular Ca that can activate a self-destructive cellular cascade involving calcium-dependent enzymes, such as phosphatases, proteases, and lipases. Lipid peroxidation can also cause production of free radicals that damage vital cellular proteins and lead to cell death. The role of mitochondria in Ca 2+ homeostasis and in control of free radicals may also be important. The pattern of cell death was first thought to reflect necrosis due to the autolysis of critical cellular proteins. However, the activation of "death genes," characteristic of programmed cell death (apoptosis), may also be involved. Seizure-related brain damage or excitotoxicity can be specific to certain types of cells in particular brain regions, perhaps due to protective factors, such as

calcium-binding proteins in some cells and sensitizing factors, such as the expression of calcium-permeable glutamate receptors in other cells. For example, excitotoxicity induced in vitro by excessive activation of AMPA-type glutamate receptors preferentially affects interneurons that express AMPA-type receptors that have high Ca 2+ permeability, providing a possible mechanism for their selective vulnerability. Several outbreaks of "amnestic" shellfish poisoning provide a vivid example of the consequences of overactivation of glutamate receptors. Domoic acid, a

-glutamate analog not present in the brain, is a natural product of certain species of marine algae that flourish during appropriate ocean conditions. Domoic acid can be concentrated by filter feeders such as shellfish. Ingestion of domoic-contaminated shellfish sporadically causes outbreaks of neurological damage, including severe seizures and memory loss (amnesia).

18/12/20 11:39 AM

CA3 regions. This pattern has been duplicated in experimental animals by electrical stimulation of afferents to

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1466

The area most sensitive to damage is the hippocam-

pus, providing further support for the excitotoxicity

hypothesis and the critical role of the hippocampus in

learning and memory. The Factors Leading to Development of

Epilepsy Are Poorly Understood

## A single seizure does not warrant a diagnosis of epilepsy. Normal people can have a seizure under

extenuating circumstances such as after drug inges-

tion or extreme sleep deprivation. Clinicians look for possible causes of seizures in such patients but usually do not begin treatment with anticonvulsants following a single seizure. Unfortunately, our understanding of what factors contribute to susceptibility to epilepsy is still rudimentary. However, progress on this front is increasing rapidly with the advent of experimental mutagenesis in animal models and clinical neurogenetics in patients including wholeexome sequencing. Some forms of epilepsy have long been considered to result in part from a genetic predisposition. For example, infants with febrile seizures often have a

family history of similar seizures. The role of genetics in epilepsy is supported by the existence of familial epileptic syndromes in humans as well as seizureprone animal models with such exotic names as Papio papio (a baboon with photosensitive seizures), audiogenic mice (in which loud sounds induce seizures), and spontaneous single-locus mutations such as reeler and totterer mice (names alluding to the clinical manifestations of cerebellar mutations in these animals). Even with a genetic predisposition or a structural lesion, the evolution of the epileptic phenotype often involves maladaptive changes in brain structure and function. Mutations in Ion Channels Are Among the Genetic Causes of Epilepsy

## Recent studies have provided a wealth of new information concerning the molecular genetics of epilepsy.

At present, more than 120 genes have been linked to

an epileptic phenotype; approximately half of these were discovered in humans and the others in animals, mostly mice. The affected proteins include ion channel subunits, proteins involved in synaptic transmission such as transporters, vesicle proteins, synaptic receptors, and molecules involved in Ca 2+ signaling. For example, seizures in the totterer mutant mouse are due to a spontaneous mutation in the gene that encodes the

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1467

Ca

Ca


2.1 or α

2+

1A

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


-subunit of the P/Q-type voltage-gated

channel. That a mutation in these classes of pro-

teins can cause epilepsy is perhaps not unexpected

given the dependence of seizures on synaptic transmission and neuronal excitability. Some of the other genes linked to epilepsy in mice have been more surprising, such as the genes for centromere BP-B, a DNA binding protein, and the

sodium/hydrogen exchanger, which is affected in the slow-wave epilepsy mouse. A wide variety of human genes cause neurological disorders, of which epilepsy is only one manifestation. For example, Rett syndrome, a disease associated with intellectual disability, autism, and seizures, is caused by mutations in MECP2 (methyl-CpG-binding protein-2), a regulator of gene transcription. Although the exact links are not known, it is clear that mutations in many different genes may result in epilepsy. In most cases, genetic epilepsy syndromes in humans have complex rather than simple (Mendelian) inheritance patterns, suggesting the involvement

of many, rather than single, genes. Nevertheless, a number of monogenic epilepsies have been identified in studies of families with epilepsy. Ortrud Steinlein and colleagues reported in 1995 that a mutation in the α4-subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptorchannel is responsible for autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), the first example of an autosomal gene defect in human epilepsy. Subsequently, other voltage- and ligand-gated channel proteins have been identified as critical genes for epilepsy. Mutations in ion channel genes (channelopathies) constitute a major cause of known monogenic epilepsies (Figure 58–15). Many more genes are being discovered by clinical exome analysis for de novo mutations. The large number of genes for K + channels and the criti -cal role of these channels in balancing excitation and inhibition are important reasons for the expanding epilepsy genome. In voltage-gated channels, mutations largely involve the main pore-forming subunit(s), but there are also examples of epilepsy-causing mutations in regu-

latory subunits. When examined in vitro, the mutant channel proteins are most commonly associated with either reductions in the expression of the channel on the surface of the plasma membrane (due to reduced targeting to the membrane or premature degradation) or altered kinetics of the channels. It is straightforward to consider how changes in ion channel gating might affect the excitability of neurons and their synchronization during seizure generation. However, ion channel mutations may also affect neuronal development and thus exert their epileptogenic effects through a

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System


Interneuron

migration

4 Excitability (channelopathies)

a

<!-- image -->

epilepsy genes discovered so far can affect multiple phases of

synaptic transmission including the migration of interneurons (1), upstream activation of interneurons (2), γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels within interneurons (3), the excitability of excitatory and inhibitory neurons (4), the release of neurotransmitters secondary action on cell migration, network forma-

tion, or patterns of gene expression.

In the early days of research on epilepsy genes,

it was widely expected that the genes would mostly underlie generalized epilepsies, based on the idea

that a gene mutation (eg, in an ion channel) would be expected to affect most neurons. However, the very first autosomal dominant epilepsy gene discovered by Steinlein and colleagues caused a focal onset (frontal lobe) epilepsy, and another gives rise to seizures originating in the temporal lobe with an auditory aura. In retrospect, this should not be so surprising because channel subunits are rarely expressed uniformly in the brain, and some brain regions are more likely to generate seizures than other regions.

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1468

5 Neurotransmitter

6 Response to

neurotransmitter

(channelopathies)

(5), and the postsynaptic response to neurotransmitters (6).

The inset shows that the impact of mutations in these genes on

neuronal excitability can affect the shape of the action potential

as well as the afterpotentials and synaptic events that follow. Mutations indicated near the spike (a) affect the repolarization of the action potential. Other mutations shown in (b) affect the afterhyperpolarization, synaptic conductances, or interspike interval. Timing of gene expression is also important. For

example, totterer mice with mutations in the pore-

forming Ca


2.1 subunit of P/Q-type Ca channels

show spike-wave–type seizures that begin in the third postnatal week, presumably because N-type Ca 2+ channels are the predominant functional isoform earlier in development, whereas P/Q-type Ca 2+ channels predominate later. The neurological phenotype begins once the mutant channel is functionally required during development. Moreover, one mutation can give rise to different epilepsy phenotypes, or different mutant genes can cause the same epilepsy phenotype. As an exam-

ple of the latter, the ADNFLE syndrome, first discovered as a mutation in the α4-subunit of the nicotinic

18/12/20 11:39 AM

2+
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System


Interneuron

migration

4 Excitability (channelopathies)

a

<!-- image -->

epilepsy genes discovered so far can affect multiple phases of

synaptic transmission including the migration of interneurons (1), upstream activation of interneurons (2), γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels within interneurons (3), the excitability of excitatory and inhibitory neurons (4), the release of neurotransmitters secondary action on cell migration, network forma-

tion, or patterns of gene expression.

In the early days of research on epilepsy genes,

it was widely expected that the genes would mostly underlie generalized epilepsies, based on the idea

that a gene mutation (eg, in an ion channel) would be expected to affect most neurons. However, the very first autosomal dominant epilepsy gene discovered by Steinlein and colleagues caused a focal onset (frontal lobe) epilepsy, and another gives rise to seizures originating in the temporal lobe with an auditory aura. In retrospect, this should not be so surprising because channel subunits are rarely expressed uniformly in the brain, and some brain regions are more likely to generate seizures than other regions.

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1468

5 Neurotransmitter

6 Response to

neurotransmitter

(channelopathies)

(5), and the postsynaptic response to neurotransmitters (6).

The inset shows that the impact of mutations in these genes on

neuronal excitability can affect the shape of the action potential

as well as the afterpotentials and synaptic events that follow. Mutations indicated near the spike (a) affect the repolarization of the action potential. Other mutations shown in (b) affect the afterhyperpolarization, synaptic conductances, or interspike interval. Timing of gene expression is also important. For

example, totterer mice with mutations in the pore-

forming Ca


2.1 subunit of P/Q-type Ca channels

show spike-wave–type seizures that begin in the third postnatal week, presumably because N-type Ca 2+ channels are the predominant functional isoform earlier in development, whereas P/Q-type Ca 2+ channels predominate later. The neurological phenotype begins once the mutant channel is functionally required during development. Moreover, one mutation can give rise to different epilepsy phenotypes, or different mutant genes can cause the same epilepsy phenotype. As an exam-

ple of the latter, the ADNFLE syndrome, first discovered as a mutation in the α4-subunit of the nicotinic

18/12/20 11:39 AM

2+

ACh receptor, can also be caused by a mutation in the

α2-subunit. But not all family members who carry this

autosomal dominant mutation have epilepsy, indicat-

ing that even in this form of monogenic epilepsy other genes as well as nongenetic factors can influence the phenotype. The GEFS+ syndrome (generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus) is a good example of this heterogeneity. It is a childhood syndrome and can involve different seizure types in different family members. GEFS+ is seen in families with mutations in the genes for one of three different Na + channel subu -nits or one of two GABA A A receptors. Family studies of generalized onset epilepsy suggest that seizure types may be heritable within families. These findings indicate that even monogenic epilepsies are likely modified by other genes, environmental influences, and even experience-dependent changes in synapses. Altered cortical development may be a common cause of epilepsy. The increased resolution of MRI scans has revealed an unexpectedly large number of cortical Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


instability. Unfortunately, the vast majority of cases of

epilepsy cannot yet be explained by even the recent

surge in the identification of epilepsy genes. The iden-

tification of large numbers of patients through online registries may provide the population samples needed to evaluate susceptibility genes that underlie complex inheritance patterns. The Genesis of Acquired Epilepsies Is a Maladaptive Response to Injury

## Epilepsy often develops following a discrete cortical injury such as a penetrating head wound. This injury

serves as the nidus for a seizure focus, leading at some

--later point to seizures. This has led to the idea that the early insult triggers a set of progressive physiological or anatomical changes that lead to chronic seizures. That is, the characteristic "silent" interval (usually months or years) between the insult and the onset of recurrent seizures may reflect progressive maladaptive molecular and cellular changes that might be amenable to therapeutic manipulation. Although an attractive hypothesis, a unified picture of this process has yet to emerge. The most promising evidence has come from studies of tissue removed from patients undergoing temporal lobectomy and rodent models of limbic seizures. In one experimental model, hyperexcitability is induced by repeated stimulation of limbic structures, such as the amygdala or hippocampus. The

malformations and localized areas of abnormal corti cal folding in patients with epilepsy. Thus, mutations that disturb the normal formation of the cortex or net work wiring are candidate genes for epilepsy. This idea is supported by the mapping of two X-linked cortical malformations with epileptic phenotypes: familial periventricular heterotopia and familial subcortical band heterotopia. The genes responsible for these two disorders that encode filamin A and doublecortin, respectively, are presumably important in neuronal migration. Small focal cortical dysplasias can function as seizure foci that give rise to partial and secondarily generalized seizures, whereas more extensive cortical malformations can cause a variety of seizure types and usually are associated with other neurological problems. Another X-linked gene, aristaless related homeobox (ARX), is an example of a cell type–specific transcription factor altering migration, because it

is expressed only in interneuron precursors. A particularly instructive example is the association of epilepsy with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), an autosomal dominant genetic disorder that results from the lack of the functional Tsc1-Tsc2 complex, leading to hyperactivity of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling pathway. Early clinical trials of mTOR inhibitors as treatment for refractory epilepsy in these patients have been promising. Such examples provide hope for linking the underlying biology of epilepsy syndromes to clinically relevant treatments. The epilepsy genome is rapidly expanding, driven by clinical exome sequencing and an appreciation of the biological pathways leading to neural network

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1469

initial stimulus is followed by an electrical response (the afterdischarge) that becomes more extensive and prolonged with repeated stimuli until a generalized seizure occurs. This process, called kindling, can be induced by electrical or chemical stimuli. Many investigators believe that kindling may contribute to the development of epilepsy in humans. Kindling is thought to involve synaptic changes in the hippocampal formation that resemble those important in learning and memory (Chapters 53

and 54). These include short-term changes in excitability and persistent morphological changes, including generation of adult-born neurons, axonal sprouting, and synaptic reorganization. Rearrangements of synaptic connections have been observed in the dentate gyrus of patients with long-standing temporal lobe seizures as well as following kindling in experimental animals. In addition to axonal sprouting (Figure 58–16), changes include alterations in dendritic structure, control of transmitter release, and novel expression and alterations in subunit stoichiometry of ion channels and pumps. The long-term changes that lead to epilepsy also are likely to involve specific patterns of gene

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A

Figure 58–16 Mossy fiber synaptic reorganization (sprout-

ing) in the human temporal lobe may cause hyperexcit-

ability.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Sutula et al. 1989.

Copyright © 1989 American Neurological Association.)

<!-- image -->

A. Timm stain of a transverse section of hippocampus removed from a patient with epilepsy at the time of temporal lobectomy for control of epilepsy. The stain appears black in the axons of the dentate granule cells (mossy fibers) due to the presence of zinc in these axons. The mossy fibers normally pass through expression. For example, the proto-oncogene c-fos and other immediate early genes as well as growth factors

can be activated by seizures. Because many immediate

early genes encode transcription factors that control other genes, the gene products that result from epileptiform activity could initiate changes that contribute to or suppress the development of epilepsy by altering such mechanisms as cell fate, axon targeting, dendritic outgrowth, and synapse formation. Highlights SG

SG

the dentate hilus (H) on their way to synapse on CA3 pyramidal

cells. In the epileptic tissue shown here, stained fibers appear

in the supragranular layer of the dentate gyrus (SG,

arrowheads), which now contains not only the granule cell dendrites but also newly sprouted mossy fibers. These aberrant sprouts of mossy fibers form new recurrent excitatory synapses on dentate granule cells. B. This high magnification of a segment of the supragranular layer shows the Timm-stained mossy fibers in greater detail.

- attributed to the distinctly different patterns of activity of cortical neurons.

2. Studies of focal onset seizures in animals reveal a

- series of events—from the activity of neurons in the seizure focus to synchronization and subse-

1. Seizures are one of the most dramatic examples

of the collective electrical behavior of the mam

malian brain. The distinctive clinical pattern of

- -quent spread of epileptiform activity throughout the cortex. The gradual loss of GABAergic surround inhibition is critical to the early steps in this progression. In contrast, generalized onset seizures are thought to arise from activity in thalamocortical circuits, perhaps combined with a general abnormality in the membrane excitability of all cortical neurons. 3. The electroencephalogram (EEG) has long provided a window on the electrical activity of the cortex, both in normal phases of arousal and dur-
- partial seizures and generalized seizures can be

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1470

- ing abnormal activities such as seizures. The EEG

18/12/20 11:39 AM

can be used to identify certain electrical activity

patterns associated with seizures, but it provides

limited insight into the pathophysiology of sei-

- zures. Several much more powerful and noninvasive approaches are now available to locate the focus of a partial seizure. This has led to the widespread and successful use of epilepsy surgery for selected patients, particularly those with complex partial seizures of hippocampal onset. The promise of invasive approaches to seizure detection and seizure prevention provides additional hope for improved control of seizures. 4. The increasing power of genetic, molecular, and modern cell-physiological approaches applied to the study of seizures and epilepsy also gives new
- hope that an understanding of these disruptions of normal brain activity will provide new therapeutic options for patients afflicted with epilepsy, as well as new insights into the function of the mammalian brain. 5. Further neurobiological studies of the progression from an acute seizure to the development of epilepsy should provide alternative strategies for
- treatment beyond the standard options of anticonvulsants or epilepsy surgery.

Gary Westbrook

Selected Reading

Cascino GD. 2004. Surgical treatment for epilepsy. Epilepsy

Res 60:179–186.

Engel J. 1989. Seizures and Epilepsy. Philadelphia: Davis.

- Kleen JK, Lowenstein DH. 2017. Progress in epilepsy: latest waves of discovery. JAMA Neurol 74:139–140.
- Krook-Magnuson E, Soltesz I. 2015. Beyond the hammer and
- the scalpel: selective circuit control for the epilepsies. Nat Neurosci 18:331–338.
- Krueger DA, Wilfong AA, Holland-Bouley K, et al. 2013. Everolimus treatment of refractory epilepsy in tuberous sclerosis complex. Ann Neurol 74:679–687.
- Kullmann DM, Schorge S, Walker MC, Wykes RC. 2014. Gene therapy in epilepsy—is it time for clinical trials? Nat Rev Neurol 10:300–304.

Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy


Lowenstein DH. 2015. Decade in review-epilepsy: edging

toward breakthroughs in epilepsy diagnostics and care.

Nat Rev Neurol 11:616–617.

- Maheshwari A, Noebels JL. 2014. Monogenic models of absence epilepsy: windows into the complex balance between inhibition and excitation in thalamocortical
- microcircuits. Prog Brain Res 213:223–252. Noebels J. 2015. Pathway-driven discovery of epilepsy genes. Nat Neurosci 18:344–350. Paz JT, Huguenard JR. 2015. Optogenetics and epilepsy: past,
- present and future. Epilepsy Curr 15:34–38. Penfield W, Jasper H. 1954. Epilepsy and the Functional
- Anatomy of the Human Brain. Boston: Little, Brown. Snowball A, Schorge S. 2015. Changing channels in pain and
- epilepsy: exploring ion channel gene therapy for disorders of neuronal hyperexcitability. FEBS Letters 589:1620–1624.
- Stables JP, Bertram EH, White HS, et al. 2002. Models for epilepsy and epileptogenesis: report from the NIH workshop. Epilepsia 43:1410–1420.
- Stafstrom CE, Carmant L. 2015. Seizures and epilepsy: an overview for neuroscientists. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5:a022426.
- References

Bagnall RD, Crompton DE, Petrovski S, et al. 2016. Exome-

based analysis of cardiac arrhythmia, respiratory control

and epilepsy genes in sudden unexpected death in epi-

- lepsy. Ann Neurol 79:522–534. Berenyi A, Belluscio M, Mao D, Buzsaki G. 2012. Closed-loop control of epilepsy by transcranial electrical stimulation. Science 337:735–737.
- Bergey GK, Morrell MJ, Mizrahi EM, et al. 2015. Long-term treatment with responsive brain stimulation in adults with refractory partial seizures. Neurology 84:810–817.
- Biervert C, Schroeder BC, Kubisch C, et al. 1998. A potassium channel mutation in neonatal human epilepsy. Science 279:403–406.
- Fisher RS, Cross JH, D'Souza C, et al. 2017. Instruction manual for the ILAE 2017 operational classification of seizure types. Epilepsia 58:531–542.
- Gadhoumi K, Lina J-M, Mormann F, Gotman J. 2016. Seizure prediction for therapeutic devices: a review. J Neurosci Methods 260:270–282.
- Haug K, Warnstedt M, Alekov AK, et al. 2003. Mutations in CLCN2 encoding a voltage-gated chloride channel are associated with idiopathic generalized epilepsies. Nat
- Genet 33:527–532. Heck CN, King-Stephens D, Massey AD, et al. 2014. Two-year reduction in adults with medically intractable partial onset epilepsy treated with responsive neurostimulation: final
- Lennox WG, Lennox MA. 1960. Epilepsy and Related Disorders Boston: Little, Brown. Lennox WG, Mattson RH. 2003. Overview: idiopathic gener-
- alized epilepsies. Epilepsia 44(Suppl 2):2–6. Lerche H, Shah M, Beck H, Noebels J, Johnston D, Vincent A.
- . results of the RNS system pivotal trial. Epilepsia 55:432–441. Kätzel D, Nicholson E, Schorge S, Walker MC, Kullmann DM. 2013. Chemical-genetic attenuation of focal neocortical seizures. Nat Commun 5:3847.
2013. Ion channels in genetic and acquired forms of epilepsy. J Physiol 591:753–764.

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1471

- Kramer MA, Eden UT, Kolaczyk E, et al. 2010. Coalescence and fragmentation of cortical networks during focal seizures. J Neurosci 30:10076–10085.

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Lothman EW. 1993a. The neurobiology of epileptiform dis-

charges. Am J EEG Technol 33:93–112.

Lothman EW. 1993b. Pathophysiology of seizures and epi-

- lepsy in the mature and immature brain: cells, synapses and circuits. In: WE Dodson, JM Pellock (eds). Pediatric
- Epilepsy: Diagnosis and Therapy, pp. 1–15. New York: Demos Publications. Lothman EW, Collins RC. 1990. Seizures and epilepsy. In: AL Pearlman, RC Collins (eds). Neurobiology of Disease pp. 276–298. New York: Oxford University Press.

alpha 4 subunit is associated with autosomal dominant

nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. Nat Genet 11:201–203.

Sutula T, Cascino G, Cavazos J, Parada I, Ramirez L. 1989.

- Mossy fiber synaptic reorganization in the epileptic human temporal lobe. Ann Neurol 26:321–330.
- Teitelbaum J, Zatorre RJ, Carpenter S, et al. 1990. Neurologic sequelae of domoic acid intoxication due to ingestion of contaminated mussels. N Engl J Med 322:1781–1787.
- , Tung JK, Berglund K, Gross RE. 2016. Optogenetic approaches for controlling seizure activity. Brain Stimul 9:801–810. von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA. 1993. Cellular mech-
- anisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:361–364.
- Mulley JC, Scheffer IE, Harkin LA, Berkovic SF, Dibbens LM. 2005. Susceptibility genes for complex epilepsy. Hum Mol Genet 14:R243–R249.
- Santhakumar V, Aradi S, Soltesz I. 2005. Role of mossy fiber sprouting and mossy cell loss in hyperexcitability: a network model of the dentate gyrus incorporating cell types
- and axonal topography. J Neurophysiol 93:437–463. Spencer WA, Kandel ER. 1968. Cellular and integrative properties of the hippocampal pyramidal cell and the comparative electrophysiology of cortical neurons. Int J Neurol
- 6:266–296. Stacey WC, Litt B. 2008. Technology insight: neuroengineering and epilepsy-designing devices for epilepsy control. Nat Clin Pract Neurol 4:190–201.
- Steinlein OK, Mulley JC, Propping P, et al. 1995. A missense mutation in the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor

Kandel-Ch58\_1447-1472.indd 1472

- Walsh CA. 1999. Genetic malformations of the human cerebral cortex. Neuron 23:19–29. Wiebe S, Blume WT, Girvin JP, Eliasziw M. 2001. Effective-
- ness and efficiency of surgery for temporal lobe epilepsy study. A randomized, controlled trial of surgery for tem-
- poral lobe epilepsy. N Engl J Med 14:211–216. Winawer MR, Marini C, Grinton BE, et al. 2005. Familial clustering of seizure types within the idiopathic generalized epilepsies. Neurology 65:523–528.
- Zhao M, Alleva R, Ma H, Daniel AGS, Schwartz TH. 2015. Optogenetic tools for modulating and probing the epileptic network. Epilepsy Res 116:15–26.

18/12/20 11:39 AM


Disorders of Conscious and

## Unconscious Mental Processes

Conscious and Unconscious Cognitive Processes Have

Distinct Neural Correlates

Differences Between Conscious and Unconscious

## Processes in Perception Can Be Seen in Exaggerated Form After Brain Damage

The Control of Action Is Largely Unconscious The Conscious Recall of Memories Is a Creative Process

Behavioral Observation Needs to Be Supplemented With Subjective Reports

Verification of Subjective Reports Is Challenging

Malingering and Hysteria Can Lead to Unreliable Subjective Reports

Highlights

A

At the other extreme, the term cognition refers to

those higher-level processes fundamental to the for-

mation of conscious experience. This is what is meant

by the term cognitive therapy, an approach to treatment pioneered by Aaron Beck and Albert Ellis and developed from behavior therapy. Rather than trying to change a patient's behavior directly, cognitive therapy has the aim of changing the patient's attitudes and beliefs (Box 59–1). In common parlance, the term cognition means thinking and reasoning, a usage closer to its Latin root cognoscere (getting to know or perceiving). Thus, the

Oxford English Dictionary defines it as "the action or faculty of knowing." Indeed, we know the world by applying thinking and reasoning to the raw data of our senses. This idea is implicit in our characterization of many kinds of disorders of cognition. After brain damage, some patients can no longer process the input emerged

lthough cognitive neuroscience

at the end of the 20th century as a major

new discipline, a precise meaning of the

term cognition remains elusive. The term is used in different ways in different contexts. At one extreme, the term cognitive in cognitive neuroscience connotes what was meant by the older term information processing. In this sense, cognition is simply what the brain does. When cognitive neuroscientists say that visual features or motor acts are represented by neural activity, they are using concepts from information processing. From this point of view, the language of cognition provides a bridge between descriptions of neural activity and behavior because the same terms can be applied in both domains.

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1473

supplied by the senses. This type of disorder was first delineated by Sigmund Freud, who called it agnosia, or loss of knowledge (Chapter 17). Agnosias can take many forms. A patient with visual agnosia can see perfectly well but is no longer able to recognize or make sense of what he sees. A patient with prosopagnosia has a specific problem recognizing faces. A patient with auditory agnosia might hear perfectly well but is unable to recognize spoken words. Cognition is sometimes impaired from birth so that a person has difficulty in acquiring knowledge. This might lead to general mental retardation or, if the

problem is more localized, to specific learning difficulties such as dyslexia (difficulty learning about written

18/12/20 11:40 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Box 59–1 Cognitive Therapy

## Dissatisfaction with psychological treatments based on

Freud's theories of unconscious motivation intensified

in the middle of the 20th century. Not only did these the-

ories have no relevance to experimental psychology, but there was no empirical evidence that psychodynamic treatments actually worked. The first form of alternative psychological therapy to emerge from laboratory studies is known as behavior therapy. The fundamental assumption of this approach is

that maladaptive behavior is learned and can therefore be eliminated by applying the Pavlovian and Skinnerian principles of stimulus-response learning. So, for example, a child who has been attacked by a dog can become fearful of all dogs, but this fearful response can be extinguished if the child learns that the conditioned stimulus (the sight of a dog) is not followed by the unconditioned stimulus (being bitten).

language) or autism (difficulty in learning about other

minds). Finally, cognition can become dysfunctional so

that the knowledge acquired about the world is false.

These disorders of thinking lead to the sort of false perceptions (hallucinations) and false beliefs (delusions) associated with major mental illnesses such as schizophrenia. Conscious and Unconscious Cognitive

Processes Have Distinct Neural Correlates

## Cognition—deriving knowledge through thinking and reasoning—is one of three components of con-

sciousness (see Chapter 42 for discussion of the con-

scious aspects of emotions, often called feelings). The other two are emotion and will. It used to be taken for granted that thinking and reasoning were under conscious voluntary control and that cognition was not possible without consciousness. By the end of the 19th century, however, Freud developed a theory of unconscious mental processes and suggested that much human behavior is guided by internal processes of which we are not aware. Of more direct importance for neuroscience was the idea of unconscious inference, originally proposed by Helmholtz. Helmholtz was the first to carry out

quantitative psychophysical experiments and to measure the speed with which afferent signals in peripheral nerves are conducted. Prior to these experiments,

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1474

Behavior therapy was shown to be quick and effec-

tive for phobias, but many mental disorders are better

characterized in terms of maladaptive thinking rather

than maladaptive behavior. In the 1960s, Aaron Beck and Albert Ellis initiated a new kind of therapy in which the principles of learning are used to change thoughts rather than behavior. This is known as cognitive therapy or cognitive behavior therapy . This form of therapy has been particularly successful in the treatment of depression. Depression is typically associated with negative thoughts (eg, a person

remembering only the bad things that have happened to him/her) and negative attitudes (eg, a person believing that he/she will never achieve his/her goals). Cognitive therapists teach their clients methods for reducing the frequency of negative thoughts and changing their negative attitudes into positive ones.

sensory signals were assumed to arrive in the brain

immediately (with the speed of light), but Helmholtz

showed that nerve conduction was actually quite slow.

He also noted that reaction times were even slower. These observations implied that a great deal of brain work intervened between sensory stimuli and conscious perception of an object. Helmholtz concluded that much of what goes on in the brain is not conscious and that what does enter consciousness (ie, what is perceived) depends on unconscious inferences. In other words, the brain uses evidence from the senses to decide on the most likely identity of the object that is causing activity in the sensory organs but does this without our awareness. This view was extremely unpopular with Helmholtz's contemporaries and, indeed, still is today. Most people believe that consciousness is necessary for

making inferences and that moral responsibility can be assigned only to decisions that are based on conscious inference. If inferences could be made without con -sciousness, there could be no ethical basis for praise or blame. Helmholtz's ideas about unconscious infer -ences were largely ignored. Nevertheless, by the middle of the 20th century, evidence began to accumulate in favor of the idea that most cognitive processing never enters consciousness.

After the development of electronic computers and the emergence of the study of artificial intelligence, researchers began to study how, and to what extent, machines could perceive the world beyond themselves.

18/12/20 11:40 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

It rapidly became clear that many perceptual processes

that at first seem simple are actually very complex

when defined as a set of computations.

Visual perception is the prime example. In the 1960s, almost no one realized how difficult it would be to build machines that could recognize the shape

and appearance of objects, because it seems so easy for us. I look out of the window and I see buildings, trees, flowers, and people. I am not aware of any mental processes behind this perception; my awareness of all these objects seems instantaneous and direct. It turns out that teaching a machine how to work out which edges go with which object in a typical cluttered visual scene containing many overlapping objects is exceptionally difficult. The computational approach to vision revealed the underlying neural processes on which our seemingly effortless perception of the world depends. Similar processes underlie all sensory perception and especially the perception of sounds as speech. Most neuroscientists now believe that we are not conscious of cognitive processes, only our perceptions. The evidence for unconscious cognitive processes comes not only from artificial intelligence studies but also studies of cognition in people with brain damage.

The effects of unconscious processes on behavior can be demonstrated most strikingly in certain patients with "blind sight," a disorder first delineated in the 1970s by Lawrence Weiskrantz. These patients have lesions in the primary visual cortex and claim to see nothing in the part of the visual field served by the damaged area. Nevertheless, when asked to guess, they are able to detect simple visual properties such as movement or color far better than is expected by chance. Despite having no sensory-based perception of objects in the blind parts of the visual field, these patients do possess unconscious information about the objects, and this information is available to guide their behavior. Another example is unilateral neglect caused by lesions in the right parietal lobe (Chapter 17). Patients with this disorder have normal vision, but they seem

unware of objects on the left side of the space in front of them. Some patients even ignore the left side of individual objects. In one experiment by John Marshall and Peter Halligan, patients were shown two drawings of a house. The left side of one house was on fire (Figure 59–1). When asked if there were any differences between the houses, patients replied "no." But when asked which house they would prefer to live in, they chose the house that was not burning. This choice was thus made based on information that was not represented in consciousness. Blind sight and unilateral neglect are just two examples of the abundant

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1475

<!-- image -->

Right posterior

parietal cortex

seem to be unaware of the left side of space (unilateral neglect

syndrome). When such patients are shown the two drawings reproduced here, they say that the two houses look the same. However, they also say that they would prefer to live in the lower house, indicating that they have unconsciously processed the image of the fire in the other house. (Adapted from Marshall and Halligan 1988.) empirical evidence for the existence of unconscious

cognitive processes, evidence not available to us

through introspection.

Currently, one of the most exciting areas of investigation in neuroscience concerns the search for the neural correlates of consciousness initiated by Fran-

cis Crick and Christopher Koch. The aim is to demonstrate qualitative differences between the neural activity associated with conscious and unconscious cognitive processes. This research is important not only because it may give us answers to the difficult question of the function of consciousness but also because it is relevant to our understanding of many neurological and psychiatric disorders. The weird experiences

18/12/20 11:41 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

and delusional beliefs of patients with certain cogni-

tive disorders were once dismissed as beyond under-

standing. Cognitive neuroscience provides us with a

framework for understanding how these experiences and beliefs can arise from specific alterations in normal cognitive mechanisms. Differences Between Conscious and

Unconscious Processes in Perception Can Be

Seen in Exaggerated Form After Brain Damage

## The relationship between sensory stimulation and perception is far from direct. Perception can change

without any change in sensory stimulation, as illus-

trated by ambiguous figures such as the Rubin figure and the Necker cube (Figure 59–2). Conversely, a big change in sensory stimulation can occur without the observer being aware of this change—the perception remains constant. A compelling example of this is change blindness. To demonstrate change blindness, two versions of a complex scene are constructed. In one well-known example developed by Ron Rensink, the picture con-

sists of a military transport plane standing on an airport runway. In one of the two versions, an engine is missing. If these two pictures are shown in alternation on a computer screen, but critically interspersed with a blank screen, it can take minutes to notice the difference even though it is immediately obvious when pointed out. (See Figure 25-8 for another example.) In light of these phenomena, we can explore the neural activity associated with changes in perception

Figure 59–2 Ambiguous figures. If you stare at the figure

on the left (the Rubin figure), you sometimes see a vase and

sometimes two faces looking at each other. If you stare at

the figure on the right (the Necker cube), you see a threedimensional cube, but the front face of the cube is

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1476

when there is no change in sensory stimulation. Like-

wise, we can discover whether changes in sensory

input are registered in the brain even if not repre-

sented in consciousness. We can ask whether there is some qualitative difference between the neural activity associated with conscious as opposed to unconscious processes. Two important results have emerged from studies of the neural activity associated with specific types of conscious percepts. First, certain kinds of percepts are

related to neural activity in specific areas of the brain. Those brain areas that are specialized for recognition of certain kinds of objects (eg, faces, words, landscapes) or for certain visual features (eg, color, motion) are more active when the object or the feature is consciously perceived (Figure 59–3). For example, when we perceive the faces in the Rubin figure, there is more activity in the area of the fusiform gyrus, which is specialized for the processing of faces. This observation also applies to deviant perception (hallucinations). After degeneration of the peripheral visual system leading to blindness, some patients

experience intermittent visual hallucinations (Charles Bonnet syndrome). These hallucinations vary from one patient to another: Some patients see colored patches, others see grid-like patterns, and some even see faces. Dominic ffytche found that these hallucinations are associated with increased activity in the secondary visual cortex, and the content of the hallucination is related to the specific locus of activity (Figure 59–4). Schizophrenic patients frequently experience complex auditory hallucinations, which usually have the form of voices talking to or about the patient. These

sometimes seen at the bottom left and sometimes at the top

right. In each figure, the brain finds two equally good, but mutu-

ally exclusive, interpretations of what is there. Our conscious

perception spontaneously alternates between these two interpretations.

<!-- image -->

18/12/20 11:41 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

House

<!-- image -->

simultaneously presenting a face to one eye and a house to

the other eye. Brain activity was measured while subjects observed these images. Subjects were instructed to press a button whenever a spontaneous switch in perception occurred

hallucinations are associated with activity in the audi-

tory cortex.

These observations suggest that conscious experi-

ence may result from activity in certain cortical regions. This idea is difficult to test experimentally, but in the

1950s, the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield found that electrical stimulation of the cortex in patients undergoing neurosurgery can generate a conscious experience. More recently, it has been found that transcranial magnetic stimulation of the cortex in the region of V5/MT can lead to seeing moving light flashes. The second important conclusion drawn from studies that seek to correlate neural activity and specific percepts is that activity in a specialized area is neces-


FFA

8 12

house is perceived (right), activity increases in the parahip-

pocampal place area (PPA). (Abbreviation: MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Tong et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 by Cell Press.)

still elicit neural activity in the visual cortex, it may

be that the damage in the right parietal cortex simply

prevents the formation of conscious representations of

objects on the left side of space. Nevertheless, this sensory activity can support an unconscious inference in patients that they would not want to live in the house that is burning on the left side. Stimuli that do not enter awareness can also elicit overt responses. A face with a fearful expression elicits a fear response in the autonomic nervous system,

sary but not sufficient to yield conscious experience. For example, in the change blindness paradigm, subjects are often unaware of large changes in the picture they are viewing. If the change involves a face, activity is elicited in the fusiform gyrus whether or not the subject is aware of the change. But when the sensory change is also perceived consciously, there is, in addition, activity in the parietal and frontal cortices (Figure 59–5). These observations are relevant to our understand ing of unilateral neglect. Since objects on the left side

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1477

-measured as an increase in skin conductance (galvanic response) because of sweating. This response occurs even if the face is immediately followed by another visual stimulus, such that the face is not consciously perceived. There may be an advantage to having a rapid but low-resolution system for recognizing dangerous things. We jump first; only later, on the basis of a slow, high-resolution system, are we able to identity the object that made us jump (Chapter 48). Damage in one or the other of these two recognition systems can explain certain otherwise puzzling neurological and psychiatric disorders. Prosopagnosia is a perceptual disorder in which faces are no longer recognizable. The patient knows

18/12/20 11:41 AM
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

House

<!-- image -->

simultaneously presenting a face to one eye and a house to

the other eye. Brain activity was measured while subjects observed these images. Subjects were instructed to press a button whenever a spontaneous switch in perception occurred

hallucinations are associated with activity in the audi-

tory cortex.

These observations suggest that conscious experi-

ence may result from activity in certain cortical regions. This idea is difficult to test experimentally, but in the

1950s, the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield found that electrical stimulation of the cortex in patients undergoing neurosurgery can generate a conscious experience. More recently, it has been found that transcranial magnetic stimulation of the cortex in the region of V5/MT can lead to seeing moving light flashes. The second important conclusion drawn from studies that seek to correlate neural activity and specific percepts is that activity in a specialized area is neces-


FFA

8 12

house is perceived (right), activity increases in the parahip-

pocampal place area (PPA). (Abbreviation: MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Tong et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 by Cell Press.)

still elicit neural activity in the visual cortex, it may

be that the damage in the right parietal cortex simply

prevents the formation of conscious representations of

objects on the left side of space. Nevertheless, this sensory activity can support an unconscious inference in patients that they would not want to live in the house that is burning on the left side. Stimuli that do not enter awareness can also elicit overt responses. A face with a fearful expression elicits a fear response in the autonomic nervous system,

sary but not sufficient to yield conscious experience. For example, in the change blindness paradigm, subjects are often unaware of large changes in the picture they are viewing. If the change involves a face, activity is elicited in the fusiform gyrus whether or not the subject is aware of the change. But when the sensory change is also perceived consciously, there is, in addition, activity in the parietal and frontal cortices (Figure 59–5). These observations are relevant to our understand ing of unilateral neglect. Since objects on the left side

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1477

-measured as an increase in skin conductance (galvanic response) because of sweating. This response occurs even if the face is immediately followed by another visual stimulus, such that the face is not consciously perceived. There may be an advantage to having a rapid but low-resolution system for recognizing dangerous things. We jump first; only later, on the basis of a slow, high-resolution system, are we able to identity the object that made us jump (Chapter 48). Damage in one or the other of these two recognition systems can explain certain otherwise puzzling neurological and psychiatric disorders. Prosopagnosia is a perceptual disorder in which faces are no longer recognizable. The patient knows

18/12/20 11:41 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Subject 1

<!-- image -->

Subject 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

visual hallucinations. The location of the neural activity and

the content of the hallucination are related. The experience of he is looking at a face but cannot recognize the face,

<!-- image -->

even a beloved face known for years. The problem

is specific to faces, since the patient may still be able

to recognize the person from their clothes, gait, and voice. However, patients with prosopagnosia are able to identify faces unconsciously. They show autonomic responses to familiar faces and do better than chance when asked to guess whether or not a face shown to them belongs to a person who is familiar. In fact, their awareness of the autonomic (emotional) responses elicited by a face may enable them to judge familiarity. Capgras syndrome, a delusion that is occasionally observed in schizophrenic patients and in some patients suffering from brain injury or dementia,

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1478

colors, patterns, objects, or faces is associated with heightened

activity (red) in specific regions of inferior temporal cortex. The

blue area is the fusiform gyrus. (Reproduced, with permission,

from ffytche et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 Springer Nature.) produces a more unsettling experience. These patients

firmly believe that someone close to them, usually a

husband or wife, has been replaced by an impostor.

They claim that the person, although similar if not identical in appearance, is in fact someone else. Often, this delusion is acted on with the demand that the impostor leave the house. Hadyn Ellis and Andy Young have suggested that this bizarre delusion is the mirror phenomenon of prosopagnosia. According to this view, the circuitry

for face recognition is intact, but the circuitry that mediates the emotional response to the face is not. As a result, patients recognize the person in front of them but, because the emotional response is lacking,

18/12/20 11:41 AM

A Unconscious detection

Fusiform gyrus the change or conscious of it. When subjects are aware of the change, activity in parietal and frontal cortex also increases.

<!-- image -->

(Reproduced, with permission, from Beck et al. 2001.)

<!-- image -->

viewed by subjects changes, whether subjects are unaware of

feel that there is something fundamentally wrong. This

account has been partially confirmed by the observa-

tion that these patients do not have normal autonomic

responses to familiar faces. This explanation implies that Capgras delusions are not the consequence of disordered thinking but of disordered experience. A patient sees the face of his

wife without having the normal emotional response. The conclusion that this is not his wife but an impostor is a cognitive response to this abnormal experience, the mind's attempt to explain the experience. The Control of Action Is Largely Unconscious

The sense that we are in control of our own actions is a

## major component of consciousness. But are we aware

of all aspects of our own actions? David Milner and Mel

Goodale studied a patient known as D.F. who demonstrates a striking lack of awareness of certain aspects of her own actions. As a result of damage to her inferior temporal lobe caused by carbon monoxide poisoning,

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1479

D.F. suffers from form agnosia—she is unable to identify

the shapes of things. She cannot distinguish a square

from an oblong card and cannot describe the orienta-

tion of a slot. Yet when she picks up the oblong card to place it through the slot, she orients her hand and forms her grasp appropriately because of the unconscious operation of visuomotor circuits (Figure 59–6). This sort of unconscious guidance is not unique to patients with brain damage. It is simply revealed more starkly in the case of D.F. because the system that nor-

mally brings visual information about shape into consciousness is impaired. Indeed, we can all make rapid and accurate grasping movements without being aware of the perceptual and motor information that is being used to control these movements. Sometimes, we are not even aware of having made the movement. This largely unconscious system for visually guided reaching and grasping is analogous to, and probably overlaps with, the rapid but poor-resolution system associated with fear responses. Although we may not be aware of the perceptual and motor details of actions like reaching and grasping,

18/12/20 11:41 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Subject with damage to

ventral visual stream

cortex, is unable to recognize objects based on their shape

(form agnosia). She cannot align the tablet with the orientation of the slot (perceptual matching) because she is not consciously aware of the orientation of either the tablet or the slot. However, when she is asked to put the tablet through the slot in a quick movement, she orients her hand rapidly and accurately. Presumably, the movement is driven by visuomotor computations of which the subject is unaware. (Adapted, with permission, from Milner and Goodale 1995.) we are vividly aware of being in control of some of our

<!-- image -->

actions—we are aware of a difference between actions

that we cause and those that happen involuntarily.

Benjamin Libet studied the phenomenon of voluntary action in controlled experiments. He asked his subjects to lift a finger "whenever they felt the urge to do so" and to report the time at which they had this urge. His subjects had no difficulty in reliably reporting the time of this subjective experience. At the same time, Libet used electroencephalography to measure the "readiness potential," a change in brain activity that occurs up to 1 second before a subject makes any voluntary movement. The time at which subjects reported feeling the urge to lift a finger occurred hundreds

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1480

of milliseconds after the beginning of this readiness

potential. This result has generated much discussion

among philosophers as well as neuroscientists con-

cerning the existence of free will. If brain activity can predict an action before a person is aware of having the urge to perform that action, does this mean that our experience of freely willing actions is an illusion? Although Libet's result has been widely replicated, the relevance of his experimental protocol for our understanding of free will remains controversial.

Lifting one finger is not an action that we often perform. Actions usually have goals. For example, we might press a button in order to ring a bell. When our actions are followed by the goal we expect, we feel that we are in control of our actions. It is this subjective experience that gives us a sense of agency, of being the cause of events. Applying Libet's paradigm to such actions, Patrick Haggard discovered the phenomenon of "intentional binding." When a deliberate movement (pressing a button) is followed by its intended goal (hearing a tone), these events are experienced subjectively as bound together in time (Figure 59–7). This temporal binding of our actions to their goals provides an empirical marker of our sense of agency, since a stronger sense of agency is associated with a

greater degree of binding. If a movement occurs passively, caused for example by magnetic stimulation to the brain, then intentional binding is decreased; we actually perceive the time between movement and outcome as longer than the actual physical time. Our sense of agency is closely linked to our belief in free will and to the idea that people can be held

Action

250 ms Tone

Objective time

Subjective time Tone

<!-- image -->

button that triggers a sound 250 ms later, they experience their

action and the sound as occurring closer together (subjective time) than they actually are (objective time). In contrast, when their finger moves involuntarily through trans cranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of motor cortex, the movements and the sound are experienced as further apart compared to objective time. Temporal binding occurs only when the movement is intended and deliberate and thus is a marker of the experience of agency. (Based on Haggard, Clark, and Kalogeras 2002.)

18/12/20 11:41 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

responsible for their actions when these are performed


line on the screen (Figure 59–8). This lack of awareness

deliberately. Intentional binding is increased when

associated with outcomes that have moral conse

-

quences. It is reduced for actions that have been commanded by others, rather than performed freely. These results do not address the question of whether or not free will exists, but they suggest that our conscious experience of acting freely has a major role in creating social norms of responsibility. Such norms are critical for maintaining social cohesion. Unconscious inference occurs in the motor domain as well as the sensory domain. Our experience of agency is created from two components: our prior

expectations and the sensory consequences of the outcome of the action. We are surprised if the actual sensations do not match what we expect, as when we pick up an object that is much lighter than anticipated (Chapter 30). If the outcome confirms our expectations, however, we pay little attention to the actual sensory evidence—we experience what we expected to happen rather than what actually happened. Pierre Fourneret and Marc Jeannerod asked subjects to draw a vertical line using a computer's mouse. The subjects could not see their hand and so could not

see that the computer created a distortion in the line displayed on the screen. The striking result was that subjects were not aware that they had moved their hand at an angle of 10° to the left to produce the vertical

<!-- image -->

Computer

are asked to draw a straight line with a computer mouse. They can

see the line on the screen but not their hand movement. The com

puter is programmed to systematically distort the line displayed on the screen. In the result shown here, the subject had to move

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1481

-

occurred for deviations of up to 15°. When subjects

were instructed not to look at the screen but simply

repeat the movement they had just made, they did not reproduce the deviant movement they had made but instead drew the straight-ahead movement that they believed they had made. It would seem that as long as the goal is realized (drawing a straightforward line), we experience the expected sensory feedback, not the actual sensory feedback. This phenomenon helps us understand some otherwise bizarre experiences. For example, after the amputation of a limb, some patients may experience a

phantom limb. They still experience the urge to move the missing limb, and they can select specific movements they want the missing limb to make. Their sensorimotor systems predict the proprioceptive sensations they would feel if they were to move an intact limb, and it is these predicted sensations that underlie the sensation of a moving phantom limb. After a limb has been paralyzed due to stroke, some patients believe that they are still able to move the limb (anosognosia for hemiplegia). Here, again,

Target such patients can select the movements they want to make and are aware of their expectations about the movement. Despite the lack of sensory evidence that follows their attempt to initiate the movement, they believe that the movement did occur.

Line

displayed

Onset of

perturbation

his hand 10° to the left to produce a vertical line on the screen.

Subjects are not aware of making such adjustments. (Adapted,

with permission, from Fourneret and Jeannerod 1998. Copyright

© 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd.)

<!-- image -->

18/12/20 11:41 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

The Conscious Recall of Memories Is a

Creative Process

## For most of us, memory is the conscious imaginative reliving of a past experience. If we take no account of

subjective experience (the behaviorist stance), however,

memory is a process by which our past experience alters future behavior. Our behavior is often affected by past experience, but without conscious recall of the memory or awareness of the influence it is having on us. Once again, this type of experience is seen most strikingly in patients with damage to specific areas of the brain. Some patients become densely amnesic after damage to the medial regions of the temporal lobe. They show no decline in intellect as measured by IQ tests

but cannot remember anything for more than a few minutes. Although devastating, this memory impairment is actually rather circumscribed. The problem is largely manifested in declarative memory, and most severely in a type of declarative memory called epi -sodic memory, the ability to recollect events in one's life (Chapter 54). Procedural memory, in which consciousness has a minor role (Chapter 53), remains intact. Thus, patients can still remember motor skills such as riding a bicycle and can often learn new motor skills at a normal rate. This selective effect of brain damage can lead to dramatic dissociations. A patient who has been learning some new skill every day for a week will deny ever having performed the task before. He is then surprised to find how skillful he has become. A widely used protocol tests subjects' ability to recall lists of words they have memorized, a task that taps a form of declarative memory. In the recall phase,

<!-- image -->

a subject is presented with a list of the words that were on the study list plus new words. An amnesic patient has great difficulty with this type of task and may misclassify most of the previously seen words as new since she cannot recall seeing them before. Nevertheless, the brain activity elicited by reading old words is different from that elicited by the new words: There is unconscious recognition of a difference, equivalent to that shown by patients with unilateral neglect or prosopagnosia. Normal subjects usually find this task easy, but they too will occasionally misclassify old words as new; as with amnesiacs, evoked brain responses in normal subjects register the distinction lost to conscious recall (Figure 59–9). Occasionally, a subject misclassifies a new word as an old one. This misclassification amounts to a false memory. Such misclassifications are most likely to

occur when the new word is semantically related to one or more of the old words. If the list of old words contained big , great , huge, then the new word large is

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1482

2 µV

including some that had been presented earlier and some that

were new. When asked to identify the words presented earlier, subjects correctly identified some of the old words but forgot others. Immediately after the visual presentation of a word, there is a brief fluctuation in the evoked potential in the brain. Evoked responses in the parietal region of the brain reflect whether or not the words had been seen before, even when subjects did not consciously recognize the words. The pattern produced by old words, whether recognized or not, is different from that produced by the new words. (Reproduced, with permission, from Rugg et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 Springer Nature.) likely to be identified as old. One explanation for this is that the perception of the new word large has been

unconsciously primed by the previous presentation of

the old words. Thus, the new word large is processed easily and quickly, and because the subject is aware of this, he concludes the word must be familiar and classifies it as old. This observation emphasizes that memory is a creative process. Our conscious memories are con -structed from both conscious recall and unconscious

knowledge. To guard against false memories, as with false percepts, we use our knowledge about the world to determine which memories are plausible. In some patients, the process by which memories are screened can become dramatically disturbed. If asked what happened yesterday, most patients with amne-

sia will say that they cannot remember, but a few will give elaborate accounts that do not correspond to reality. Such false memories are called confabulations and can sometimes be extremely implausible. For example, one patient said that he had met Harold Wilson

18/12/20 11:41 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

(a former British Prime Minister) and discussed a


the few laws in psychology, such as Weber's law (the

building job they were both working on.

The creative mechanisms needed to reconstruct

memories of past episodes are also involved when imagining events that might happen in the future. In

amnesic patients with damage to the hippocampus, the ability to imagine new events is markedly impaired. Behavioral Observation Needs to Be

Supplemented With Subjective Reports

## By the middle of the 20th century, it had become clear that the classic behaviorist approach was inadequate

for the exploration of many psychological processes.

Language acquisition, selective attention, and working memory cannot be understood in terms of relations between stimuli and responses, however complex the relationships postulated. The demonstration that some cognitive processes are unconscious requires that we move even further from behaviorism. If we want to explore the whole

range of conscious and unconscious cognitive processes, we will not be able to do so by focusing on overt behavior alone. We cannot assume that a subject making purposeful, goal-directed actions is necessarily aware of the stimuli eliciting the action or even of the action itself. We must supplement behavioral observations with subjective reports. We have to ask the subject, "Did you see the stimulus? Did you move your hand?" One hundred years ago, introspection was the major method for obtaining data in psychology. How else could one study consciousness? But different

schools of psychology obtained different results and, as John B. Watson emphasized, there seemed to be no objective way of deciding who was right. How can you independently confirm subjective experience? Thus, the method fell into disrepute. During the decades in which psychology was dominated by behaviorism, subjective reports were not considered an appropriate source of data. As a result, methods for recording subjective reports lag far behind methods for recording overt behavior. Regrettably, many studies of cognitive processes still do not require reports of subjective experience from subjects because of the long tradition of excluding such reports. The one domain of psychology in which subjective reports continued to be used was psychophysics, the study of the relationship between sensation (physi-

cal energy) and perception (psychological experience) introduced by Fechner in 1860. Such studies give robust and reliable results and have created some of

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1483

just-noticeable difference between two stimuli is pro-

portional to the magnitude of the stimuli). In these

studies, subjects are typically asked "Did you see the stimulus?" or "How confident are you that you saw the stimulus?" Signal detection theory, developed in the 1950s, provides a robust methodology for measuring the ability to detect a stimulus (discriminability, d ′ ) indepen-

dently of any reporting biases (Chapter 17). If your discriminability is high, then you will successfully detect small changes in the stimuli. More recently, there has been increasing interest in the second question, "How confident are you that you saw the stimulus?" Reporting one's confidence requires metacognition, the ability to reflect on our cognitive processes. This ability has an important role in the control of behavior. For example, if we realize that we are not performing some task very well, we might slow down and pay more attention to what we are doing. The ability to reflect on our perception can be measured objectively. Likewise, the ability to reflect on the quality of our cognitive processes can also be assessed

quantitatively. If your metacognitive accuracy is high, then you will successfully discriminate between your right and wrong answers. In other words, a correct detection will usually be associated with a high degree of confidence, whereas an incorrect detection will be associated with a low degree of confidence. However, your metacognitive accuracy need not be related to your signal detection ability. You could be good at detecting signals while at the same time poor at knowing whether your answers are likely to be right or wrong. In fact, patients with damage to anterior prefrontal cortex retain the ability to detect visual signals but show a marked deficit in metacognitive accuracy. Verbal reports cannot, of course, be used in signal detection experiments with laboratory animals or preverbal infants. One alternative is to identify aspects of

behaviors that reflect confidence. For example, if we are confident that we left our keys somewhere in the living room, we will spend more time looking there before we switch to the hall. Louise Goupil and Sid Kouider applied this insight to the study of metacognition in preverbal infants. The infants had to remember which of two boxes had contained a toy that was later removed without their knowledge. They spent more time searching inside the correct box. The infants were also more likely to ask an adult for help to open the correct box. These effects did not occur after long intervals. This behavior suggests that the infants had some insight into their current state of knowledge. They knew when they could no longer remember which was

18/12/20 11:41 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

the correct box. Similar experiments suggest that rats

and monkeys also have some metacognitive abilities.

Verification of Subjective Reports Is Challenging

Reports of subjective experience, such as confidence,

## serve like a meter. Just as an electrical meter converts electrical resistance into the position of a pointer on a dial

(reading 100 ohms), so a subject converts a light stimulus into the report of a color ("I see red"). But there is a critical way in which the meter is not like a person. The meter does not experience red and cannot communicate meaning. And, although the meter might be faulty, it can never pretend to see red when it is really seeing blue. Most of the time, we presume that subjective reports are true, that is, the subject is trying as far as possible to give an accurate description of his experience. But how can we be sure that we can rely on these subjective reports?

2.5


<!-- image -->

ange)

scanned while they viewed or imagined faces and houses.

In the first block of trials, subjects alternately viewed a face or a house. When viewing a face, brain activity increases in the fusiform face area of the inferior temporal lobe (FFA). When viewing a house, brain activity increases in the

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1484

The problem of verifying subjective reports can

partially be addressed with the use of brain imaging.

Brain imaging studies have shown that neural activ-

ity occurs in localized areas of the brain during mental activity that is not associated with any overt behavior. The content of such mental activity, such as imagining or daydreaming, can be known only from the subject's reports. If we scan a subject while he says he is imagining moving his hand, activity will be detected in many parts of the motor system. In most motor regions,

this activity is less intense than the activity associated with an actual movement, but it is well above resting levels. Similarly, if a subject reports that she is imagining a face she has recently seen, activity can be detected in the fusiform gyrus, the "face recognition area" (Figure 59–10). In these examples, the location of the observed neural activity detected by the scanner

Viewed Imagined

a face and a house. The same brain regions are active during

both the imagining and direct viewing of faces and houses, although the activity is less pronounced during the imagined viewing. (Reproduced, with permission, from O'Craven and Kanwisher 2000. Copyright © 2000 MIT.)

Viewed Imagined

18/12/20 11:41 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

provides independent confirmation of the content


unconscious priming effects, he would perform better

of the experience reported by the subject. The content of

consciousness can, in certain limited cases, be inferred

from patterns of neural activity. Malingering and Hysteria Can Lead to Unreliable Subjective Reports

## What if a subject reports seeing "blue" even though what they experienced was red? How could this arise, and what is the status of the subjective report in such

cases? Consider a patient who has become amnesic as a result of extensive damage to the medial temporal cortex. Shown a photograph of someone whom he sees

every day on the ward, the patient denies ever having seen this person, even while physiological measurements (electroencephalogram or skin conductance) show a response to this photo (but not to photos of people he has not seen before). We conclude that conscious memory processes have been damaged while unconscious processes remain intact. This patient's subjective report is an accurate account of what he knows consciously, but it excludes those things he "knows" that have not entered consciousness. Another patient, found wandering on the street, shows no evidence of brain damage but reports he cannot remember anything about himself or his history.

When shown photographs of people from his past, he denies any knowledge of them, but at the same time, he shows physiological responses to the photos. In this case, because of the lack of detectable brain damage (and other features of the memory loss), we begin to wonder about the truthfulness of his statements. Perhaps the physiological responses indicate that he does consciously recognize people. Subsequently, the patient is identified by the police, and we discover that he is wanted for a serious crime committed in the neighboring county. Our doubts about the reliability of his reports increase. Finally, our suspicions are confirmed when he foolishly tells a fellow patient, "It's so easy to fool those clinical psychologists." In this case, we have direct evidence that the patient was deliberately misleading others about himself. To deceive others, we must be conscious not only

of our own mental state but also that of others. Is there some way we can test for deceit? One approach is to use a memory test of the kind discussed earlier. The patient studies a list of words. He is then shown a new list consisting of the words he has just studied and new words, and he must decide whether each word is old or new. A genuine amnesic would not recognize any of the words; he would have to guess, but through

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1485

than chance. The malingering patient can recognize

the old words but will have a strong tendency to

deny that he has seen them before. Unless he is very sophisticated, he may perform worse than chance. It seems we should be able to distinguish between the genuine amnesic and the malingerer. A third kind of patient also simulates amnesia (or some other disorder) but does so unconsciously and thus is not a malingerer. Such a case would be called

hysterical or psychogenic amnesia. Like the malingerer, his performance on the recognition test is worse than chance. Nonetheless, he is not aware of his simu -lation. The same mechanism occurs in normal people who have been hypnotized and then told that they will have no memory for what has just happened. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as a dissociated state: That part of the mind that records experiences and makes verbal reports has become dissociated from the part that is creating the simulation. Hysterical simulations can also create sensory loss, such as hysterical blindness, and motor disorders, such as hysterical paralysis or hysterical dystonia. We are still a long way from understanding the cognitive processes or underlying physiology of these disorders. A key problem is how to distinguish hys-

teria from malingering. From the standpoint of conscious experience, the two disorders are quite different: The malingerer is aware that he is simulating, whereas the hysterical patient is not. Yet the patients' subjective reports and overt behavior in the two cases are very similar. Is there no measure that can distinguish between these different disorders? Perhaps the only way to demonstrate the critical distinction between these different states of consciousness is through neuroimaging studies. Highlights

1. The study of mental disorders forces us to con-

front the conceptual gap between the mental and

the physical. It is no longer possible to maintain

- that mental disorders have mental causes, whereas physical disorders have physical causes. 2. Cognitive neuroscience has had a major impact on our attempts to bridge this gap because its descriptive language, the language of information process-
- ing, can be applied simultaneously to psychological and neural processes. Information theory and the development of the computer hint at how science can address the question of how subjective experience can emerge from activity in a physical brain.

18/12/20 11:41 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

3. It is now clear that perception, action, and mem-

ory are the result of many parallel processes and

that, although some of these processes support

- conscious experience, the majority occur below the level of awareness. 4. Striking abnormalities occur when some of these processes are damaged while others remain intact. One patient, D.F., with damage to the inferior tem-
- poral cortex, is no longer consciously aware of the shape of an object and hence cannot describe it or recognize what it is. She can nevertheless form her hand into the appropriate shape to pick up the object. 5. We have very little awareness of the details of our actions, but we are vividly aware of being in control (the sense of agency). In extreme cases, this
- sense of agency can become detached from the control of action. After limb amputation, many people experience having a phantom limb that they can move, and after a limb has been paralyzed due to a stroke, some patients believe that they can still move the limb. 6. Recollection of the past is not like replaying a video. Memory is a creative process based on imperfect recall filled out with general knowl-
- edge. Through loss of this creativity, patients with amnesia have difficulty with imagining the future as well as remembering the past. 7. Subjective experience is an important part of human life. When we make a decision, our choice is indicated by our behavior, but our confidence
- in that choice is a subjective experience. We can study such experiences through verbal report. Confidence in our choices is an example of metacognition (ie, the ability to reflect on our cognitive processes). Damage to the frontal cortex can impair metacognition, while leaving decisionmaking intact. 8. Verbal reports are not always reliable. People can fake memory loss in order to escape justice. Malingering of this kind is very difficult to detect,
- since it closely resembles disorders such as hysterical amnesia, in which the patient is not aware that he is simulating the disorder. The challenge for cognitive neuroscience is to distinguish these cases.

Christopher D. Frith

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1486

Selected Reading

Dehaene S. 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How

the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. New York: Viking.

Frith CD. 2007. Making Up the Mind: How the Brain Creates

- Our Mental World. Oxford: Blackwell. Gazzaniga MS (ed). 1995. Cognitive Neuroscience: A Reader

.

- Oxford: Blackwell. Marr D. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the
- Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information San Francisco: Freeman.

.

- McCarthy R, Warrington EK. 1990. Cognitive Neuropsychology: A Clinical Introduction. London, San Diego: Academic Press. Sacks O. 1970. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat and
- Other Clinical Tales. New York: Touchstone.
- References Bauer RM. 1994. Autonomic recognition of names and faces

in prosopagnosia: a neuropsychological application of the

Guilty Knowledge test. Neuropsychology 22:457–469.

- Beck DM, Rees G, Frith CD, Lavie N. 2001. Neural correlates of change and change blindness. Nat Neurosci 4:645–650. Beck JS. 1995. Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond. New York:
- Guilford Press. Burgess PW, Baxter D, Rose M, Alderman N. 1986. Delusional
- paramnesic syndrome. In: PW Halligan, JC Marshall (eds). Method in Madness: Case Studies in Cognitive Neuropsychiatry ,
- pp. 51–78. Hove, UK: Psychology Press. Caspar EA, Christensen JF, Cleeremans A, Haggard P. 2016. Coercion changes the sense of agency in the human brain. Curr Biol 26:585–592.
- Dierks T, Linden DE, Jandl M, et al. 1999. Activation of Heschl's gyrus during auditory hallucinations. Neuron 22:615–621.
- Ellis HD, Young AW. 1990. Accounting for delusional misidentification. Br J Psychiatry 157:239–248. ffytche DH, Howard RJ, Brammer MJ, David A, Woordruff P,
- Williams S. 1998. The anatomy of conscious vision: an fMRI study of visual hallucinations. Nat Neurosci 1:738–742.
- Fleming SM, Ryu J, Golfinos JG, Blackmon KE. 2014. Domainspecific impairment in metacognitive accuracy following anterior prefrontal lesions. Brain 137:2811–2822.
- Fotopoulou A, Tsakiris M, Haggard P, Vagopoulou A, Rudd A, Kopelman, M. 2008. The role of motor intention in motor awareness: an experimental study on anosognosia
- for hemiplegia. Brain 131:3432–3442. Fourneret P, Jeannerod M. 1998. Limited conscious monitoring of motor performance in normal subjects. Neuropsychology 36:1133–1140.
- Frith CD. 2011. Explaining delusions of control: the comparator model 20 years on. Conscious Cogn 21:52–54. Frith CD. 2013. Action, agency and responsibility. Neuropsy-
- chologia 55:137–142. Glinsky EL, Schacter DL. 1988. Long-term retention of com-
- puter learning in patients with memory disorders. Neuropsychology 26:173–178.

18/12/20 11:41 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

3. It is now clear that perception, action, and mem-

ory are the result of many parallel processes and

that, although some of these processes support

- conscious experience, the majority occur below the level of awareness. 4. Striking abnormalities occur when some of these processes are damaged while others remain intact. One patient, D.F., with damage to the inferior tem-
- poral cortex, is no longer consciously aware of the shape of an object and hence cannot describe it or recognize what it is. She can nevertheless form her hand into the appropriate shape to pick up the object. 5. We have very little awareness of the details of our actions, but we are vividly aware of being in control (the sense of agency). In extreme cases, this
- sense of agency can become detached from the control of action. After limb amputation, many people experience having a phantom limb that they can move, and after a limb has been paralyzed due to a stroke, some patients believe that they can still move the limb. 6. Recollection of the past is not like replaying a video. Memory is a creative process based on imperfect recall filled out with general knowl-
- edge. Through loss of this creativity, patients with amnesia have difficulty with imagining the future as well as remembering the past. 7. Subjective experience is an important part of human life. When we make a decision, our choice is indicated by our behavior, but our confidence
- in that choice is a subjective experience. We can study such experiences through verbal report. Confidence in our choices is an example of metacognition (ie, the ability to reflect on our cognitive processes). Damage to the frontal cortex can impair metacognition, while leaving decisionmaking intact. 8. Verbal reports are not always reliable. People can fake memory loss in order to escape justice. Malingering of this kind is very difficult to detect,
- since it closely resembles disorders such as hysterical amnesia, in which the patient is not aware that he is simulating the disorder. The challenge for cognitive neuroscience is to distinguish these cases.

Christopher D. Frith

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1486

Selected Reading

Dehaene S. 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How

the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. New York: Viking.

Frith CD. 2007. Making Up the Mind: How the Brain Creates

- Our Mental World. Oxford: Blackwell. Gazzaniga MS (ed). 1995. Cognitive Neuroscience: A Reader

.

- Oxford: Blackwell. Marr D. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the
- Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information San Francisco: Freeman.

.

- McCarthy R, Warrington EK. 1990. Cognitive Neuropsychology: A Clinical Introduction. London, San Diego: Academic Press. Sacks O. 1970. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat and
- Other Clinical Tales. New York: Touchstone.
- References Bauer RM. 1994. Autonomic recognition of names and faces

in prosopagnosia: a neuropsychological application of the

Guilty Knowledge test. Neuropsychology 22:457–469.

- Beck DM, Rees G, Frith CD, Lavie N. 2001. Neural correlates of change and change blindness. Nat Neurosci 4:645–650. Beck JS. 1995. Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond. New York:
- Guilford Press. Burgess PW, Baxter D, Rose M, Alderman N. 1986. Delusional
- paramnesic syndrome. In: PW Halligan, JC Marshall (eds). Method in Madness: Case Studies in Cognitive Neuropsychiatry ,
- pp. 51–78. Hove, UK: Psychology Press. Caspar EA, Christensen JF, Cleeremans A, Haggard P. 2016. Coercion changes the sense of agency in the human brain. Curr Biol 26:585–592.
- Dierks T, Linden DE, Jandl M, et al. 1999. Activation of Heschl's gyrus during auditory hallucinations. Neuron 22:615–621.
- Ellis HD, Young AW. 1990. Accounting for delusional misidentification. Br J Psychiatry 157:239–248. ffytche DH, Howard RJ, Brammer MJ, David A, Woordruff P,
- Williams S. 1998. The anatomy of conscious vision: an fMRI study of visual hallucinations. Nat Neurosci 1:738–742.
- Fleming SM, Ryu J, Golfinos JG, Blackmon KE. 2014. Domainspecific impairment in metacognitive accuracy following anterior prefrontal lesions. Brain 137:2811–2822.
- Fotopoulou A, Tsakiris M, Haggard P, Vagopoulou A, Rudd A, Kopelman, M. 2008. The role of motor intention in motor awareness: an experimental study on anosognosia
- for hemiplegia. Brain 131:3432–3442. Fourneret P, Jeannerod M. 1998. Limited conscious monitoring of motor performance in normal subjects. Neuropsychology 36:1133–1140.
- Frith CD. 2011. Explaining delusions of control: the comparator model 20 years on. Conscious Cogn 21:52–54. Frith CD. 2013. Action, agency and responsibility. Neuropsy-
- chologia 55:137–142. Glinsky EL, Schacter DL. 1988. Long-term retention of com-
- puter learning in patients with memory disorders. Neuropsychology 26:173–178.

18/12/20 11:41 AM

Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes

Goupil L, Romand-Monnier M, Kouider S. 2016. Infants ask


Öhman A, Soares JJ. 1994. "Unconscious anxiety": phobic

for help when they know they don't know. Proc Natl

Acad Sci U S A 113:3492–3496.

- Haggard P, Clark S, Kalogeras J. 2002. Voluntary action and conscious awareness. Nat Neurosci 5:382–385. Hassabis D, Kumaran D, Vann SD, Maguire EA. 2007.
- Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot imagine new experiences. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:1726–1731.
- Jacoby LL, Whitehouse K. 1989. An illusion of memory: false recognition influenced by unconscious perception. J Exp Psychol Gen 118:126–135.
- Kopelman MD. 1995. The assessment of psychogenic amnesia. In: AD Baddeley, BA Wilson, FN Watts (eds). Handbook of Memory Disorders. New York: Wiley.
- Libet B, Gleason CA, Wright EW, Pearl DK. 1983. Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity (readiness potential). The unconscious initiation
- of a freely voluntary act. Brain 106:623–642. Maniscalco B, Lau H. 2011. A signal detection theoretic approach for estimating metacognitive sensitivity from confidence ratings. Conscious Cogn 21:422–430.
- Marshall JC, Halligan PW. 1988. Blindsight and insight in visuo-spatial neglect. Nature 336:766–767. Milner AD, Goodale MA. 1995. The Visual Brain in Action.
- Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. Moore J, Haggard P. 2008. Awareness of action: inference and
- prediction. Conscious Cogn 17:136–144. Moretto G, Walsh E, Haggard P. 201 Experience of agency
- and sense of responsibility. Conscious Cogn 20:1847–1854. O'Craven KM, Kanwisher N. 2000. Mental imagery of faces
- and places activates corresponding stimulus-specific brain regions. J Cogn Neurosci 12:1013–1023.

Kandel-Ch59\_1473-1487.indd 1487

responses to masked stimuli. J Abnorm Psychol 103:231–240.

Penfield W, Perot P. 1963. The brain's record of auditory and

- visual experience: a final summary and discussion. Brain 86:595–696.
- Rensink RA, O'Regan JK, Clark JJ. 1997. To see or not to see: the need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychol Sci 8:368–373.
- Rugg MD, Mark RE, Walla P, Schloerscheidt AM, Birch CS, Allan K. 1998. Dissociation of the neural correlates of implicit and explicit memory. Nature 392:595–598.
- Schurger A, Mylopoulos M, Rosenthal D. 2016. Neural antecedents of spontaneous voluntary movement: a new perspective. Trends Cogn Sci 20:77–79.
- Shepherd J. 2012 Free will and consciousness: experimental studies. Conscious Cogn 21:915–927. Smith CH, Oakley DA, Morton J. 2013. Increased response
- time of primed associates following an "episodic" hypnotic amnesia suggestion: a case of unconscious volition.
- Conscious Cogn 22:1305–1317. Stewart L, Battelli L, Walsh V, Cowey A. 1999. Motion perception and perceptual learning studied by magnetic stimulation. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol Suppl
- 51:334. Swets JA, Tanner WPJ, Birdsall TG. 1959. Decision processes in perception. Psychol Rev 68:301–340. Tong F, Nakayama K, Vaughn JT, Kanwisher N. 1998. Bin-
- ocular rivalry and visual awareness in human extrastriate cortex. Neuron 21:753–759.
- Watson JB. 1930. Behaviorism. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. Weiskrantz L. 1986. Blindsight: A Case Study and Its Implications. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

18/12/20 11:41 AM


Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Cognitive Impairments,

Deficit Symptoms, and Psychotic Symptoms

Schizophrenia Has a Characteristic Course of

## Illness With Onset During the Second and Third Decades of Life

The Psychotic Symptoms of Schizophrenia Tend to Be Episodic The Risk of Schizophrenia Is Highly Influenced

by Genes Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Abnormalities in Brain

## Structure and Function Loss of Gray Matter in the Cerebral Cortex Appears to

## Result From Loss of Synaptic Contacts Rather Than Loss of Cells

Abnormalities in Brain Development During Adolescence May Be Responsible for Schizophrenia Antipsychotic Drugs Act on Dopaminergic Systems

in the Brain Highlights


n this chapter and the next, we examine disor-

ders that affect perception, thought, mood, emo-

tion, and motivation: schizophrenia, depression,

bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders. These have been challenging to understand, but recent progress in genetic analysis has begun to yield significant clues to their pathogenesis. Mental illness has damaging effects on individuals, families, and society. The World Health Organization reports that mental illnesses, in the aggregate, con-

stitute the leading cause of disability worldwide and

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1488

are the leading risk factors for the 800,000 annual sui-

cides reported by the World Health Organization. In

addition, depression and anxiety disorders frequently

co-occur with and worsen the outcomes of diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, stroke, and several other illnesses. Medications such as antipsychotic drugs, lithium, and antidepressant drugs discovered during the mid20th century made it possible to close large and often

substandard mental hospitals; however, halfway houses and other less restrictive treatment settings did not materialize in sufficient numbers. As a result, many people with schizophrenia and severe bipolar disorder become homeless at some time in their lives, and in many countries, individuals with severe mental disorders compose a large fraction of prison populations. In addition, although antipsychotic drugs, lithium, and antidepressant drugs have played important roles in controlling symptoms of mental disorders, signifi-

cant limitations in treatment efficacy remain. For example, there are no effective treatments for the highly disabling cognitive impairments and deficit symptoms of schizophrenia. Even for symptoms that benefit from existing medications, such as hallucinations and delusions, residual symptoms remain and relapses are the rule. Because of significant scientific challenges posed by the human brain and limitations in animal models of mental disorders, there has been little advance in the efficacy of psychiatric drugs for more than 50 years. However, recent progress in human genetics and neural science has created significant opportunities to improve upon this unfortunate state of affairs.

20/01/21 1:13 PM

Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Cognitive


existing treatments such as antipsychotic drugs, which

Impairments, Deficit Symptoms, and

Psychotic Symptoms

## In medicine, the understanding of a disease, and therefore its diagnosis, is ultimately based on identification

of two features: (1) etiological factors (eg, microbes, act on one "downstream" aspect of the disease process, exert no beneficial effects on cognitive impairments or deficit symptoms. At the beginning of the 20th century, Emil Kraepelin in Germany recognized that cognitive decline was a distinguishing feature of schizophrenia, because psy-

toxins, or genetic risks) and (2) mechanism of pathogenesis (the processes by which etiologic agents produce disease). While human genetics and neural science are beginning to provide insights into the etiology and pathogenesis of disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism spectrum disorders, this research has not yet yielded objective diagnostic tests or biomarkers. As a result, psychiatric diagnoses still rely on a description of the patient's symptoms, the examiner's observations, and the course of the ill ness over time. Schizophrenia is a very severe illness. Its symptoms can be divided into three clusters: (1) cognitive symptoms; (2) deficit, or negative, symptoms; and (3)

psychotic symptoms. These symptom clusters exhibit different temporal patterns of onset—with cognitive impairments and deficit symptoms typically the earliest. The different timing of onset and the precise symptoms of each cluster are thought to result from the effects of developmental pathogenic mechanisms on different neural circuits and brain regions. As a result,

Box 60–1 Thought Disorder

## The structure of a psychotic person's speech may

range from wandering to incoherence, a symptom

commonly referred to as loosening of association.

Other examples of schizophrenic speech include neologisms (idiosyncratically invented words), blocking (sudden spontaneous interruptions), or clanging (associations based on the sounds rather than the meanings of words, such as, "If you can make sense out of nonsense, well, have fun. I'm trying to make cents out of sense. I'm not making cents anymore. I have to make dollars.") Examples of loosening of associations are: "I'm supposed to be making a film but I don't know what is going to be the end of it. Jesus Christ is writing

a book about me."

"I don't think they care for me because two million camels . . . 10 million taxis . . . Father Christmas on the rebound."

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1489

-chotic symptoms occur in a variety of psychiatric conditions. Indeed, Kraepelin's term for what later came to be called schizophrenia was dementia praecox, a term that highlighted the early onset of cognitive loss. Cognitive impairments in schizophrenia target working memory and executive function, declarative memory, verbal fluency, the ability to identify the emotions conveyed by facial expressions, and other aspects of social cognition. These impairments do not significantly improve with existing medications, but ongoing research shows promising, albeit still modest, benefits from psychological therapies aimed at cognitive remediation. Deficit symptoms include blunted emotional responses, withdrawal from social interaction, impoverished content of thought and speech, and loss of

motivation. Psychotic symptoms include hallucinations, delusions, and disordered thought such as loosening of association (Box 60–1). Psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia are responsive to antipsychotic drugs. These drugs also reduce psychotic symptoms that

Question: "How does your head feel?" Answer: "My

head, well that's the hardest part of the job. My memory

is just as good as the next working man's. I tell you what

my trouble is, I can't read. You can't learn anything if you can't read or write properly. You can't pick up a nice book, I don't just mean a sex book, a book about literature or about history or something like that. You can't pick up and read it and find things out for yourself." Several types of loosening of association have been described (eg, derailment, incoherence, tangentiality, or loss of goal). However, it remains unclear whether these

reflect disturbances in fundamentally different mechanisms or different manifestations of a common underlying disturbance, such as the inability to represent a "speech plan" to guide coherent speech. A disturbance of such a mechanism would be consistent with, and may parallel, impairment of control of other cognitive functions in schizophrenia, such as deficits in working memory.

20/01/21 1:13 PM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

occur in other neuropsychiatric disorders, including

bipolar disorder, severe depression, and neurodegen-

erative disorders such as Parkinson disease, Huntington

disease, and Alzheimer disease. Schizophrenia Has a Characteristic Course of

Illness With Onset During the Second and Third

Decades of Life

## Schizophrenia affects 0.25% to 0.75% of the population worldwide, with only modest regional differences.

Males are more commonly affected than females, with

the sex ratio estimated to be 3:2, and onset is often earlier in males. Schizophrenia typically begins during the late teen years or the early to mid-twenties. Enduring cognitive and deficit symptoms generally begin months and sometimes years prior to the onset of psychotic symptoms. This period is referred to as the ultra-high-risk state by some researchers and as the schizophrenia prodrome by others. Individuals in this risk state generally have measurable declines in cognitive functioning accompanied by such symptoms as social isolation, suspiciousness,

and decreased motivation to engage in school work or other tasks. Attenuated psychotic symptoms often follow, including transient and mild hallucinations. Not every teen with such symptoms progresses to develop the full spectrum of symptoms warranting a diagnosis of schizophrenia. A small fraction recovers; others develop serious psychiatric conditions other than schizophrenia. Antipsychotic medications do not appear to benefit individuals in the risk state, nor do they delay the onset of schizophrenia. However, talk therapies and therapies delivered via computer-based approaches aimed at cognitive remediation show promise in delaying the onset of psychosis. The Psychotic Symptoms of Schizophrenia

Tend to Be Episodic

## Psychotic symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions, are the most dramatic manifestations of

schizophrenia. Hallucinations are percepts that occur

in the absence of appropriate sensory stimuli, and they may occur in any sensory modality. In schizophrenia, the most common hallucinations are auditory. Typically, an affected person hears voices, but noises and music are also common. Sometimes, the voices will carry on a dialog and frequently are experienced as derogatory or bullying. Occasionally, voices will issue commands to the affected individual that can create a high risk of harm to self or others.

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1490

Delusions are firm beliefs that have no realistic

basis and are not explained by the patient's culture, nor

are they amenable to change by argument or evidence.

Delusions may be quite varied in form. For some affected individuals, reality is significantly distorted: The world is full of hidden signs meant only for the affected person (ideas of reference), or the person believes that he is being closely watched, followed, or persecuted (paranoid delusions). Others may experience bizarre delusions; for example, they may believe that someone is inserting thoughts into or extracting thoughts from their minds or that their close relatives have been replaced by aliens from another planet. In addition to the person's enduring cognitive impairments, psychotic episodes are frequently accompanied by disordered thought and odd patterns of speech (Box 60–1). Psychotic symptoms may also occur in other neuropsychiatric disorders, such as bipolar disorder, major (unipolar) depression, various neurodegenerative

disorders, and drug-induced states. However, these other conditions can usually be distinguished from schizophrenia by associated symptoms and age of onset. Once schizophrenia has become fully manifest, psychotic symptoms tend to be episodic. Periods of florid psychosis accompanied by markedly disordered thinking, emotion, and behavior are interspersed with periods in which psychotic symptoms are milder or even absent. Psychotic episodes typically require hospitalization; the severity and duration of such episodes are markedly shortened by antipsychotic drugs. First and second episodes of psychosis often respond fully to antipsychotic drugs, but cognitive impairments and deficit symptoms typically persist. After the first few psychotic relapses, people with schizophrenia typically suffer residual psychotic symptoms even between their acute relapses and suffer these symptoms despite treatment with antipsychotic drugs. Cognitive and social functioning typically continue to deteriorate over several years until they reach a plateau well below the person's premorbid level of functioning. The Risk of Schizophrenia Is Highly

Influenced by Genes

## As early as 1930, Franz Kalman in Germany studied familial patterns of schizophrenia and concluded that

genes contribute significantly. To separate genetic from

environmental influences more clearly, Seymour Kety, David Rosenthal, and Paul Wender examined children who were adopted at or shortly after birth in Denmark. They found that the rate of schizophrenia in the biological family of the adoptee was much more strongly

20/01/21 1:13 PM

Figure 60–1 The lifetime risk of schizo-

phrenia increases as a function of

genetic relatedness to a person with

schizophrenia.  The risk of schizophrenia rises with genetic relatedness to an affected individual and, therefore, with increased sharing of DNA sequences. However, the pattern of segregation in families does not follow simple Mendelian ratios; rather, inheritance reflects genetic complexity. In addition, risk varies within categories of relatedness (first- and second-degree relatives), suggesting a role for unshared developmental or environmental effects. (Reproduced, with permission, from Gottesman 1991.)

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1491

Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

predictive of schizophrenia than the rate of schizo-

phrenia in the adoptive family.

Kety and his colleagues also observed that some

of the biological relatives of adoptees with schizophrenia exhibited milder symptoms related to schiz-

ophrenia, such as social isolation, suspiciousness, eccentric beliefs, and magical thinking, but not frank hallucinations or delusions. Since Kety's time, it has been observed that such relatives may also exhibit cognitive impairments that are intermediate between unaffected individuals and those with schizophrenia. They also may exhibit thinning of the cerebral cortex observed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that is also intermediate between healthy individuals and those with schizophrenia. (Cortical thinning in schizophrenia is discussed below.) Such individuals are now diagnosed with schizotypal disorder, which appears to be the milder end of the schizophrenia spectrum of psychotic disorders. The severity and nature of symptoms appear to be influenced by the individual's overall burden of risk-associated genetic variants as well as exposure to environmental risk factors. Irving Gottesman's studies of extended pedigrees of Danish patients with schizophrenia supported the importance of genes. Gottesman noted the correlations


DNA sequences with the patient) than among second-

degree relatives (including aunts, uncles, nieces,

nephews, and grandchildren, who share 25% of their

DNA sequences). Even third-degree relatives (who share only 12.5% of the patient's DNA sequences) were at higher risk for schizophrenia than the approximately 1% of the general population at risk for this disease (Figure 60–1). Based on the differences in levels of risk Gottesman measured in these pedigrees, he recognized that schizophrenia risk was not transmitted within families as

Mendelian dominant or recessive traits (ie, it was not caused by a single genetic locus). He predicted correctly that schizophrenia is a polygenic trait, involving a large number of loci throughout the human genome. This genetic architecture underlies many human phenotypes, including disease phenotypes, and may involve many hundreds of loci within the genome. In polygenic traits, variants at each disease-associated locus contribute small, additive effects to the phenotype. Genetic risk variants act together with environmental factors to produce the schizophrenia phenotype. In 2014, a large global consortium reported on a genome-wide association study of more than 35,000 individuals with schizophrenia. The study identi-

between the risk of schizophrenia in relatives and the degree to which they shared DNA sequences with an affected person. He found a greater lifetime risk of schizophrenia among first-degree relatives (including parents, siblings, and children, who share 50% of Genes

shared fied 108 genome-wide significant loci associated with schizophrenia that were distributed across the genome. The research continues, and the number of known loci is already greater than 250. Each of these loci represents a segment of DNA identified by a single Relationship to schizophrenic individual None (general population)

<!-- image -->

1%

48%

20 30 40 50

20/01/21 1:13 PM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

nucleotide polymorphism that confers a small incre-

ment in risk (typically 5%–10%) for schizophrenia.

The value of such allelic variants is as a tool to iden

-

tify genes that play a role in the molecular mechanism of disease. In turn, the implicated genes help identify molecular pathways that can potentially be exploited in the development of therapeutic drugs. In addition to the utility of genetics for discovering biological processes involved in disease, it can also contribute to the stratification of study populations in

epidemiological and clinical studies. A person's risk of schizophrenia or other disorders can be estimated by calculating his or her total burden of common risk alleles for the condition. The result is a polygenic risk score, a measure that is increasingly being used to stratify populations by genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia in both clinical studies and in epidemiologic studies of environmental risk factors. Environmental risk factors for schizophrenia that have been replicated across studies include nutrient deprivation in utero (notably in studies following fam-

ines), season of birth (winter and early spring birth), urban birth, and migration. The analysis of causal factors within such broad categories of exposure is likely to benefit from knowing who is susceptible. Moreover, clues to environmentally induced causal pathways may be found in the risk genotypes of those with schizophrenia who have had a particular exposure. Given the lack of objective diagnostic tests, current diagnostic criteria, such as those within the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental

Disorders, are based on clinical observation and course of illness. As a result, individuals currently diagnosed with schizophrenia are highly heterogeneous. Polygenic risk scores can explain only a portion of the variance in schizophrenia cohorts, and the scores provide only probabilistic information. However, they represent the first objective tool that permits stratification of subjects diagnosed with schizophrenia. As such, the application of such scores may begin to diminish heterogeneity in clinical studies ranging from neuroimaging to neurophysiological studies to treatment trials. Although almost all cases of schizophrenia reflect polygenic risks, as predicted by Gottesman, a small percentage of cases are highly influenced by the pres-

ence of a penetrant mutation that typically exerts pleiotropic effects, including intellectual disability, resulting in what is often called syndromic schizophrenia. Most of these penetrant mutations are copy number variants: deletions, duplications, or sometimes triplications of a particular segment of a chromosome. The most common and best studied cause of syndromic schizophrenia is the 22q11.2 microdeletion,

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1492

which accounts for approximately 1% of patients diag-

nosed with schizophrenia. The microdeletion typi-

cally occurs de novo and results in loss of one of two

copies of 38 to 44 genes. As is typical for such copy number variations, those affected suffer from a com -plex of symptoms. The syndrome accompanying the 22q11.2 microdeletion, sometimes called velocardiofacial or DiGeorge syndrome, includes cognitive disability, cardiovascular defects, and facial dysmorphology. The penetrance of each of these symptoms and signs is independent of the others; thus, affected individuals have different combinations of phenotypes. Individuals with the 22q.11.2 microdeletion have a 25% to 40% risk of schizophrenia and a 20% risk of autism. Other syndromic forms of psychosis are similarly variable. Syndromic forms of schizophrenia can provide important windows into the biology of psychosis, even if their similarities to common polygenic types of schiz-

ophrenia are still a matter of study. One powerful advantage of penetrant mutations is the ability to generate cellular and animal models in order to characterize their effects on brain structure and function. A second advantage is the ability to prospectively study individuals carrying these mutations. Studying syndromic schizophrenia, therefore, has the potential to reveal much about basic pathophysiological mechanisms. One important area of investigation is how copy number variations and other high-penetrance mutations that lead to psychosis manifest based on a person's genetic background, specifically the many common DNA variants that influence risk. To this point, recent findings suggest that the propensity in individuals carrying a copy number variation to develop psychotic symptoms may result from a strong interaction of the copy number variation with the person's polygenic background risk for schizophrenia, suggesting significant shared mechanisms between schizophrenia associated with single genetic mutations and that associated only with polygenic variants. Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Abnormalities

in Brain Structure and Function

## Abnormalities in the structure and function of the brain have been identified in schizophrenia both by

postmortem examination and by a variety of noninva-

sive technologies in living patients. The best replicated finding, both by postmortem study and by structural MRI, is loss of gray matter in prefrontal, temporal, and parietal regions of cerebral cortex (Figure 60–2) with counterbalancing increases in the size of the cerebral ventricles (Figure 60–3). Thinning of the cerebral cortex

20/01/21 1:13 PM

Figure 60–2 Gray matter loss in

schizophrenia. Gray matter loss is

well documented in schizophrenia.

<!-- image -->

First-degree relatives who do not have a diagnosis of schizophrenia still often exhibit cortical gray matter loss intermediate between healthy individuals and those diagnosed with schizophrenia. Consistent with this, a study that examined losses of cortical gray matter in monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs discordant for schizophrenia compared to healthy matched control twins found significant losses in those at genetic risk for schizophrenia but without the disease. Those members of twin pairs diagnosed with schizophrenia demonstrated additional, disease-specific cortical thinning in dorsolateral prefrontal, superior temporal, and superior parietal association areas. These additional defects appear to reflect the influence of nongenetic factors involved in pathogenesis (eg, developmental or environmental factors). The diseasespecific gray matter loss correlates with the degree of cognitive impairment rather than with duration of illness or drug treatment. The images here show regional deficits in gray matter in monozygotic twins with schizophrenia relative to their healthy co-twins (n = 10 pairs) viewed from the right, left, and right oblique perspectives. Differences in twins are illustrated by the pseudocolor scale superimposed on cortical surface maps, with pink and red indicating the greatest statistical significance. (Reproduced, with permission, from Cannon et al. 2002.)

Figure 60–3 Enlargement of lateral

ventricles in schizophrenia. Mag-

netic resonance imaging comparison

of monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. The affected member of the twin pair has the enlarged ventricles characteristic of schizophrenia. Because there is a wide range of normal ventricular volumes in the population, an unaffected monozygotic twin serves as a particularly appropriate control subject. Because monozygotic twins have identical genomes, this comparison also illustrates the role of nongenetic factors in schizophrenia.

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1493

<!-- image -->

Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

<!-- image -->


20/01/21 1:13 PM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

is most pronounced in the dorsolateral prefrontal

cortex, a brain region critical for working memory

and thus cognitive control of thought, emotion, and

behavior. Loss of gray matter in the superior temporal gyrus, temporal pole, amygdala, and hippocampus in schizophrenia has also been correlated with impairments in

cognition, recognition of emotions in others, and regulation of emotion in the affected person. Functional neuroimaging using positron emission tomography and functional MRI (fMRI) has demonstrated that patients' deficits in performing working memory tasks while being imaged are associated with decrements in the activation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a brain region known to play a critical role in working memory (Figure 60–4). There is also growing recognition that schizophrenia is characterized by disruptions in connectivity between brain regions (Figure 60–5). Anatomical con- failures to recruit prefrontal cortical regions during tasks that require working memory (Figures 60–4

and 60–5).

Abnormalities in Brain Development During Adolescence May Be Responsible for Schizophrenia

## Schizophrenia exhibits a stereotypic onset between late adolescence and early adulthood, with cognitive decline and negative symptoms occurring months or

years before the onset of psychosis. This timing suggests the pathogenesis of schizophrenia might involve abnormalities in the late stages of brain development during adolescence, when cognitive function, emotion regulation, and executive function normally mature. Throughout development, neurons elaborate an excessively large number of synaptic connections. Generally, synapses are strengthened and preserved when

nectivity can be measured by diffusion tensor imaging, which identifies major axon tracts as they course between brain regions. Functional connectivity between brain regions can be estimated physiologically by measuring the degree to which activity patterns in different brain regions correlate with each other, using such approaches as resting state fMRI and electrophysiology. Both imaging and physiological methods reveal that individuals with schizophrenia have deficits in the connections between brain regions. Weaker connections would likely impair cognition and complex behaviors. Loss of Gray Matter in the Cerebral Cortex Appears to Result From Loss of Synaptic Contacts Rather

Than Loss of Cells

## Postmortem studies have examined the cellular abnor malities that underlie the gross anatomical findings

and functional deficits in schizophrenia. These studies

have revealed that gray matter loss in the prefrontal and temporal cortical regions is not the result of cell death but rather a reduction in dendritic processes. As a consequence, the packing density of cells in the cerebral cortex increases. More cells per unit volume and less total gray matter contribute to enlargement of the ventricular spaces. A reduction in dendrites and dendritic spines on pyramidal neurons, the most common type of excitatory neuron in the neocortex (Figure 60–6), would

-they are utilized, while weak or inefficient synapses are eliminated through a process called pruning. The process of synaptic refinement, which involves both synaptogenesis and pruning, results in neural computations that are efficient and adapted to the environment. Experience-dependent synaptic refinement was first described in the visual cortex, where pruning of weak connections is necessary for the emergence of binocular vision (see Chapter 49). Synaptogenesis and pruning continue throughout life, making possible new learning and updating of older memories. However, superimposed on such local events are significant waves of synaptic pruning that are spatially specific and developmentally timed. The last such wave in human brain maturation occurs during adolescence and early adulthood, with pruning in the temporal and prefrontal association cortex. This late wave of pruning is followed by myelination of many axons in these areas of cortex. In the early 1980s, Irwin Feinberg hypothesized that schizophrenia might result from abnormal and excessive synaptic pruning during adolescence. Post-

likely signify a loss of synaptic contacts in affected brain regions in individuals with schizophrenia. The loss of synaptic connections could underlie abnormalities in long-range functional connectivity and

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1494

mortem examination of the brains of persons with schizophrenia subsequently demonstrated a reduction of dendritic spines, and of synapses, in prefrontal and temporal cortices. Studies in nonhuman primates, taken together with human postmortem and neuroimaging studies, suggest that loss of dendritic arbors does not result from antipsychotic medications taken by many individuals with schizophrenia. The onset of cognitive impairment and negative symptoms during this period is consistent with the idea that synaptic pruning somehow goes haywire, damaging the ability of the cerebral cortex to process information. When the overpruning hypothesis was first enunciated in the

20/01/21 1:13 PM

Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

Diminished

activity DLPFC

<!-- image -->

Brain activity in subjects with schizophrenia performing a

working memory task

A Inferior posterior prefrontal cortex Normal activity

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

0.1

<!-- image -->

Figure 60–4 Deficits in the function of prefrontal cortex in Long prefrontal cortex (IPPFC; Brodmann's area 44/46) as a function

schizophrenia. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)

was used to test the hypothesis that in patients with schizo-

phrenia working memory engages circuits in the prefrontal cortex differently than in controls. Activity in the prefrontal cortex of two groups—patients with schizophrenia (first-episode patients who had never been given antipsychotic drugs) and healthy controls—was examined while subjects performed a working memory task. Subjects were presented with a sequence of letters and instructed to respond to a particular letter (the "probe" letter) only if it immediately followed another specified letter (the "contextual cue" letter). Demands on working memory were increased by increasing the delay between the cue and the probe letters. The greater demand on working memory requires greater activation of prefrontal cortical circuits. (Adapted, with permission, from Barch et al. 2001.) A. In both patients with schizophrenia and controls, normal increases in activation within inferior posterior regions of

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1495

of demand on working memory suggest that the function of

these regions remains intact in schizophrenia. The plot shows

the fMRI signal change that occurs in the right side of the prefrontal cortex in the long-delay and short-delay conditions in healthy controls and in patients with schizophrenia. Similar effects were observed for the left side. B. There is less activity in Brodmann's area 46/49, a region of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), in patients with schizophrenia relative to healthy controls. Unlike Brodmann's area

44/49 (shown in part A), Brodmann's area 46/49 is not activated normally in subjects with schizophrenia, consistent with the deficit in working memory seen in patients with schizophrenia. Selective impairment of one region of prefrontal cortex alongside other regions that appear to have normal function suggests that the impairment is due to a regionally specific process rather than a diffuse and nonspecific pathological process.

20/01/21 1:13 PM

% fMRI signal change Healthy controls Schizophrenic subjects
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

Diminished

activity DLPFC

<!-- image -->

Brain activity in subjects with schizophrenia performing a

working memory task

A Inferior posterior prefrontal cortex Normal activity

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

0.1

<!-- image -->

Figure 60–4 Deficits in the function of prefrontal cortex in Long prefrontal cortex (IPPFC; Brodmann's area 44/46) as a function

schizophrenia. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)

was used to test the hypothesis that in patients with schizo-

phrenia working memory engages circuits in the prefrontal cortex differently than in controls. Activity in the prefrontal cortex of two groups—patients with schizophrenia (first-episode patients who had never been given antipsychotic drugs) and healthy controls—was examined while subjects performed a working memory task. Subjects were presented with a sequence of letters and instructed to respond to a particular letter (the "probe" letter) only if it immediately followed another specified letter (the "contextual cue" letter). Demands on working memory were increased by increasing the delay between the cue and the probe letters. The greater demand on working memory requires greater activation of prefrontal cortical circuits. (Adapted, with permission, from Barch et al. 2001.) A. In both patients with schizophrenia and controls, normal increases in activation within inferior posterior regions of

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1495

of demand on working memory suggest that the function of

these regions remains intact in schizophrenia. The plot shows

the fMRI signal change that occurs in the right side of the prefrontal cortex in the long-delay and short-delay conditions in healthy controls and in patients with schizophrenia. Similar effects were observed for the left side. B. There is less activity in Brodmann's area 46/49, a region of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), in patients with schizophrenia relative to healthy controls. Unlike Brodmann's area

44/49 (shown in part A), Brodmann's area 46/49 is not activated normally in subjects with schizophrenia, consistent with the deficit in working memory seen in patients with schizophrenia. Selective impairment of one region of prefrontal cortex alongside other regions that appear to have normal function suggests that the impairment is due to a regionally specific process rather than a diffuse and nonspecific pathological process.

20/01/21 1:13 PM

% fMRI signal change Healthy controls Schizophrenic subjects



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Figure 60–5 Decreased functional connectivity in

schizophrenia. Correlations in neural activity between

72 defined brain regions were measured in patients

with schizophrenia and in control subjects by resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging. (Repro-

duced, with permission, from Lynall et al. 2010.) A. Brain regions that showed statistically significant reductions in functional connectivity in patients compared to controls are highlighted in red .

B. Mean (+/– standard error of the mean) functional connectivity between each brain region and the rest of the brain for patients and healthy controls.

A

Controls &gt; Patients

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->


Figure 60–6 Photomicrographs of pyramidal

neurons from the cerebral cortex from human

brains stained by the Golgi method.

A. A layer III pyramidal neuron from a control brain, showing its morphology and its dendrites which are studded with spines.

B. A higher power view showing spines on a dendrite of a pyramidal neuron from a control brain.

C. A segment of a dendrite devoid of spines from the cerebral cortex of a person who had schizophrenia. (Scale: A: 30 μm; B: 20 μm;

C: 15 μm.)  Spine numbers are a rough proxy for the number of synaptic contacts onto the dendrite from other neurons; thus the paucity of spines in schizophrenia is consistent with fewer synaptic contacts than are found in the cerebral cortex of healthy brains. (Reproduced, with permission, Garey et al. 1998. With permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.)

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1496

<!-- image -->


20/01/21 1:13 PM

Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

1980s, it lacked a plausible molecular or cellular mech-

anism that might explain how synaptic pruning might

go awry in schizophrenia. Recent genetic analysis may

have provided a solution. Unbiased, large-scale genetic studies have found that the strongest association with risk for schizophrenia lies within the major histocompatibility (MHC)

locus on chromosome 6. The MHC locus encodes many proteins involved in immune function. Fine mapping of the locus pinpointed the largest genetic association signal to the genes encoding complement factor C4, a component of the classic complement cascade that, outside the brain, is involved in tagging microbes and damaged cells for engulfment and destruction by phagocytic cells. Subsequent analysis showed that the risk for schizophrenia is elevated as a function of increased expression in the brain of C4A (one of two isoforms). This finding adds support to the overpruning hypothesis because one function of the complement system in brain is to tag weak or inefficient synapses for removal by microglia (Figure 60–7). Elevated expression of the complement factor C4A involved in synaptic pruning is certainly not the only mechanism leading to schizophrenia. As with any

polygenic disorder, no one gene is necessary or sufficient for the disease phenotype. Thus, not everyone with schizophrenia has a high-risk C4A genotype, and not everyone with a high-risk C4A genotype develops schizophrenia. Many other genes are implicated in the risk for schizophrenia. Several such risk factors other than C4 are involved in regulation of the complement cascade, but the vast majority are not. Many of the genes associated with schizophrenia that have been identified to date are involved in various aspects of the structure and function of synapses; several encode ion channels. Thus, it seems likely that the genetic risk for schizophrenia involves, at least in part, synaptic function, synaptic plasticity, and synaptic pruning, and overpruning of synapses during adolescence is one plausible mechanism that should be explored further in studies of youth at high risk for schizophrenia. Nevertheless, other pathways, as yet less well characterized, may also turn out to be important. We have a long way to go in understanding the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Antipsychotic Drugs Act on Dopaminergic

Systems in the Brain

## All current antipsychotic drugs produce their therapeutic effects by blocking D 2 dopamine receptors in

the forebrain. These drugs have many other effects at

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1497

A High levels of C4A

C3b

<!-- image -->

nervous system involve both synaptogenesis and elimination

of weak synapses. Complement factor 3b (C3b) is thought to serve as a "punishment signal" that identifies weak synapses for phagocytosis by microglia. Complement factor 4 (C4), a component of the complement cascade, is synthesized by neurons and astrocytes and recruits C3b to weak synapses. In humans, a complex genomic locus on chromosome 6 contains varying numbers of copies of the genes that encode the complement factor C4 proteins, C4A and C4B. Variants within this locus that give rise to high levels of C4A expression in brain increase schizophrenia risk. (Reproduced, with permission, from Christina Usher and Beth Stevens.)

20/01/21 1:13 PM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

various neurotransmitter receptors and intracellular

signaling pathways, but these other actions primarily

influence their side effects, not their main therapeutic

mechanisms (Figure 60–8). The first effective antipsychotic drug, chlorpromazine, was developed for its antihistaminic and sedating effects and was first investigated as a surgical preanes-

thetic by Henry Laborit in 1952. Based on its sedating effects, it was tested in psychotic patients soon thereafter. These tests showed, surprisingly, reduced hallucinations and delusions; indeed, the sedative effect of chlorpromazine is now considered a side effect. The success of chlorpromazine led to attempts to discover


Dopamine

transmission

blocked other antipsychotic drugs. Although many chemi- cally diverse antipsychotic drugs are now in use, all share the same initial action of chlorpromazine in the brain, the ability to block the D 2 dopamine receptor. As a class, these drugs ameliorate psychotic symptoms not only in schizophrenia, but also in bipolar disorder, severe depression, and various neurodegenerative disorders. None of the antipsychotic drugs provide effective treatment for the cognitive impairments or deficit symptoms of schizophrenia. Among their side effects, chlorpromazine and related drugs caused Parkinson-like motor symptoms. Because Parkinson disease is caused by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain, the occurrence of Parkinson-like side effects suggested to Arvid Carlsson that these drugs acted by decreasing dopaminergic transmission. Following up on this idea, Carlsson established that the antipsychotic drugs block dopamine receptors. Two families of dopamine receptors are known. The D 1 family, which in humans includes D 1 and D 5 , are coupled to stimulatory G proteins that activate adenylyl cyclase. The D 2 family, which includes D 2 , D 3 , and D 4 , are coupled to the inhibitory G protein (G i ) that inhibits the cyclase and activates a hyperpolarizing K + channel. A second signaling pathway for D 2 receptors is mediated by β-arrestin. The D 1 receptor is expressed in the striatum and is the major class of dopamine receptor in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. The D 2 receptor is expressed most densely in the striatum, cerebral cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus. Correlations between receptor binding studies and clinical efficacy on psychotic symptoms indicated that the D 2 family is the molecular target for the therapeutic actions of antipsychotic drugs. Clozapine, an antipsychotic drug discovered in 1959, had a low liability for causing Parkinson-like motor side effects. However, because it had some Remoxipride Clozapine Prochlorperazine S-sulpiride Chlorpromazine

dopamine receptors. On the

with their affinity for D

<!-- image -->


horizontal axis is the average daily dose required to achieve similar levels of clinical efficacy. On the vertical axis is Ki Ki concentration of drug required to bind 50% of D 2 receptors in vitro. The higher the drug concentration required, the lower is the affinity of the drug for the receptor. One caveat is that the measurements on the two axes were not entirely independent of each other, as the ability of a drug to block D 2 receptors in vitro was often used to help determine doses used in clinical trials. Clozapine, which does not fall on the line, has significantly greater efficacy than the others. The mechanism of its greater efficacy is not understood. (Adapted, with permission, from Seeman et al. 1976.)

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1498

, the 100 1000 severe side effects, including a small chance of causing a potentially lethal loss of blood granulocytes, its use was discontinued until a clinical trial in the late 1980s clearly showed that it had greater efficacy than other antipsychotic drugs. Clozapine caused improvement in some individuals who had not responded to other antipsychotic drugs. It was reintroduced in conjunction with weekly monitoring of white cell counts; attempts to equal the efficacy of clozapine also motivated the development of second-generation antipsychotic drugs that mimicked some of its receptor binding properties, notably the ability to block serotonin 5-HT 2A receptors, an action that appears to diminish motor side effects. Large-scale clinical trials of the second-generation antipsychotic drugs have shown that their efficacy is no greater than the first-generation drugs, with none

20/01/21 1:13 PM

Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia

having efficacy equal to clozapine. The liability of


with schizophrenia are frequently unable to suc-

second-generation drugs for causing Parkinson-like

motor side effects is lower than that of the first genera-

tion, but they typically cause more severe weight gain and other metabolic problems. Because drugs that reduce psychotic symptoms do so by blocking D 2 receptors, investigators have asked: What is the role of dopamine in the symptoms of schiz- ceed in school or to hold down jobs, even at times when antipsychotic drugs effectively control their

- hallucinations and delusions. 5. Postmortem and neuroimaging studies document loss of gray matter in the prefrontal and temporal cerebral cortex in a pattern that is consistent with
- recep -cognitive impairments, such as deficits in working memory. 6. The gray matter loss results from decreased dendritic arborization and decreased dendritic spines, which implies that synaptic connections are also
- reduced. One hypothesis consistent with these anatomic findings and with the typical age of onset in adolescence is that schizophrenia is triggered by excessive and inappropriate synaptic pruning in the prefrontal and temporal cerebral cortices during adolescence and young adulthood. 7. Progress in the genetic analysis of schizophrenia combined with the use of new tools to study systemslevel neuroscience promises to help attain the
- much needed advances in understanding disease mechanisms and in discovering new therapeutics.

Steven E. Hyman

Joshua Gordon

ophrenia? Although some drugs that block D 2 tors reduce psychotic symptoms, other drugs that increase dopamine at synapses, such as amphetamine and cocaine, can produce psychotic symptoms when taken chronically at high doses. Thus, Carlsson suggested that dopaminergic systems are hyperactive in schizophrenia. Evidence for this hypothesis has been difficult to obtain. The most direct evidence for this idea comes from studies begun in the mid-1990s that found that amphetamine-induced increases in dopamine release were greater in patients with schizophrenia than in healthy subjects. These studies suggest that abnormalities in amphetamine-sensitive processes— such as dopamine storage, vesicular transport, dopamine release, or dopamine reuptake by presynaptic neurons—may lead to hyperactivity in the subcortical dopaminergic systems and could contribute to the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia, the symptoms that respond to antipsychotic drugs. Although dopamine activity may increase in subcortical regions of the brain in schizophrenia, it may decrease in cortical regions; such a decrease might

contribute to the cognitive impairments seen in schizophrenia. In particular, there may be fewer D 1 receptors in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia, which would be consistent with the observation that D 1 receptors in the prefrontal cortex normally play a role in working memory and in executive functions. Highlights

1. Schizophrenia is a chronic, profoundly disabling

disorder characterized by dramatic psychotic

symptoms as well as deficits in emotion, motiva-

- tion, and cognition. 2. Risk for schizophrenia is an inherited, polygenic trait. 3. Antipsychotic drugs are effective in reducing hal-
- lucinations, delusions, and thought disorder but do not benefit the cognitive and deficit symptoms
- of schizophrenia. 4. Cognitive impairments reduce the ability of people with schizophrenia to regulate their behavior in accordance with their goals. As a result, people

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1499

Selected Reading

Barch DM. 2005. The cognitive neuroscience of schizophre-

nia. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 1:321–353.

Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Holtzman D, Malenka RJ. 2015. Molec-

- ular Neuropharmacology: Foundation for Clinical Neuroscience, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Owen MJ, Sawa A, Mortensen PB. 2016. Schizophrenia. Lancet 388:86–97. Stephan AH, Barres BA, Stevens B. 2012. The complement
- systems: an unexpected role in synaptic pruning during development and disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:369–389.
- References Addington J, Heinssen R. 2012. Prediction and prevention of

psychosis in youth at clinical high risk. Annu Rev Clin

Psychol 8:269–289.

- Barch DM, Carter CS, Braver TS, et al. 2001. Selective deficits in prefrontal cortex function in medication-naïve patients with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58:280–288.
- Brans RG, van Haren NE, van Baal GC, et al. 2008. Heritability of changes in brain volume over time in twin

20/01/21 1:13 PM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

pairs discordant for schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry

65:1259–1268.

Cannon TD, Thompson PM, van Erp TG, Toga AW. 2002.

Cortex mapping reveals regionally specific patterns of genetic and disease-specific gray-matter deficits in twins

- discordant for schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:3228–3233. Feinberg I. 1983. Schizophrenia: caused by a fault in programmed synaptic elimination during adolescence? J Psychiatr Res 17:319–324.
- Fisher M, Loewy R, Hardy K, Schlosser D, Vinogradov S. 2013. Cognitive interventions targeting brain plasticity in the prodromal and early phases of schizophrenia. Annu
- Rev Clin Psychol 9:435–463. Fusar-Poli P, Borgwardt S, Bechdolf A, et al. 2013 The psychosis high-risk state: a comprehensive state-of-the-art review. JAMA Psychiatry 70:107–120.
- Garey LJ, Ong WY, Patel TS, et al. 1998. Reduced dendritic spine density on cerebral cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 65:
- 446–453. Glantz LA, Lewis DA. 2000. Decreased dendritic spine density on prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:65–73.
- Gottesman II. 1991. Schizophrenia Genesis: The Origins of Madness. New York: Freeman. Gur RE, Cowell PE, Latshaw A, et al. 2000. Reduced dorsal
- and orbital prefrontal gray matter volumes in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:761–768.
- Kambeitz J, Abi-Dargham A, Kapur S, Howes OD. 2014. Alterations in cortical and extrastriatal subcortical dopamine function in schizophrenia: systematic review and
- meta-analysis of imaging studies. Br J Psychiatry 204: 420–429. Kane J, Honigfeld G, Singer J, Meltzer H. 1988. Clozapine for the treatment-resistant schizophrenic. A double-blind comparison with chlorpromazine. Arch Gen Psychiatry
- 45:789–796. Kety SS, Rosenthal D, Wender PH, Schulsinger F. 1968. The types and prevalence of mental illness in the biological and adoptive families of adopted schizophrenics. J Psych
- Res 6:345–362.

Kandel-Ch60\_1488-1500.indd 1500

Lesh TA, Niendam TA, Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS. 2011.

Cognitive control deficits in schizophrenia. Mechanisms

and meaning. Neuropsychopharmcology 36:316–338.

- Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al. 2005. Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 353:1209–1223.
- Lynall M-E, Bassett DS, Kerwin R, et al. 2010. Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia. J Neurosci 30:9477–9487.
- McGrath J, Saha S, Welham J, El Saadi O, MacCauley C, Chant D. 2004. A systematic review of the incidence of schizophrenia: the distribution of rates and the influence
- of sex, urbanicity, migrant status, and methodology. BMC Med 2:13. Mortensen PB, Pedersen CB, Westergaard T, et al. 1999. Effects of family history and place and season of birth on the risk of schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 340:603–608.
- Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, et al. 1999. Progressive cortical change during adolescence in childhood-onset schizophrenia. A longitudinal magnetic resonance imag-
- ing study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 56:649–654. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. 2014. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 511:421–427.
- Seeman P, Lee T, Chau-Wong M, Wong K. 1976. Antipsychotic drug doses and neuroleptic/dopamine receptors Nature 261:717–9.
- Sekar A, Bialas AR, de Rivera H, et al. 2016. Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4. Nature 530:177–183.
- Suddath RL, Christison GW, Torrey EF, Casanova MF, Weinberger DR. 1990. Anatomical abnormalities in the brains of monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia.
- N Engl J Med 322:789–794. Thompson PM, Vidal C, Giedd JN, et al. 2001. Mapping adolescent brain change reveals dynamic wave of accelerated gray matter loss in very early-onset schizophrenia. Proc
- Natl Acad Sci USA 98:11650–11655. Vidal CN, Rapoport JL, Hayashi KM, et al. 2006. Dynamically spreading frontal and cingulate deficits mapped in adolescents with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry
- 63:25–34.

20/01/21 1:13 PM


Disorders of Mood and Anxiety

Mood Disorders Can Be Divided Into Two General Classes:

Unipolar Depression and Bipolar Disorder

Major Depressive Disorder Differs Significantly From

## Normal Sadness Major Depressive Disorder Often Begins Early in Life

A Diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder Requires an Episode of Mania

Anxiety Disorders Represent Significant Dysregulation of

Fear Circuitry Both Genetic and Environmental Risk Factors Contribute to

## Mood and Anxiety Disorders Depression and Stress Share Overlapping Neural Mechanisms

Dysfunctions of Human Brain Structures and Circuits Involved in Mood and Anxiety Disorders Can Be Identified

by Neuroimaging

## Identification of Abnormally Functioning Neural Circuits Helps Explain Symptoms and May Suggest Treatments A Decrease in Hippocampal Volume Is Associated With

Mood Disorders Major Depression and Anxiety Disorders Can

Be Treated Effectively Current Antidepressant Drugs Affect Monoaminergic

## Neural Systems Ketamine Shows Promise as a Rapidly Acting Drug to

Treat Major Depressive Disorder Psychotherapy Is Effective in the Treatment of Major

Depressive Disorder and Anxiety Disorders Electroconvulsive Therapy Is Highly Effective

Against Depression Newer Forms of Neuromodulation Are Being Developed

to Treat Depression Bipolar Disorder Can Be Treated With Lithium and

Several Anticonvulsant Drugs

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1501

Second-Generation Antipsychotic Drugs Are Useful

Treatments for Bipolar Disorder

Highlights


epression, bipolar disorder, and anxiety

disorders have been well documented in med

-

ical writings since ancient times. In the fifth

century BC, Hippocrates taught that moods depended on the balance of four humors—blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. An excess of black bile (melancholia is the ancient Greek term for black bile) was believed to cause a state dominated by fear and despondency. Robert Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy (1621) was not only an important medical text but also viewed literature and the arts through the lens of melancholia. Such texts describe symptoms that remain familiar today; they also recognized that symptoms of depression and of anxiety often occur together. In this chapter, we discuss mood and anxiety disorders together, not only because they frequently cooccur but also because of overlapping genetic and

environmental risk factors and some shared neural structures, including regions of the amygdala, hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and insular cortex. Mood Disorders Can Be Divided Into Two

General Classes: Unipolar Depression and

## Bipolar Disorder There are no objective medical tests for mood and anxiety disorders. Thus, diagnosis depends on obser-

vation of symptoms, behavior, cognition, functional

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

impairments, and natural history (including age of

onset, course, and outcome). Patterns of familial trans-

mission and response to treatment can also inform

diagnostic classification. Based on such factors, it is possible to distinguish between two major groupings of mood disorders: unipolar depression and bipolar disorder. Unipolar depression, when severe and pervasive, is classified as major depression or major depressive disorder. Major depression is diagnosed when people suffer from depressive episodes alone. Bipolar disorder is diagnosed when episodes of mania also occur. The lifetime risk of major depressive disorder in the United States is approximately 19%. Within any 1-year period, 8.3% of the population suffers major

depression. The prevalence of depression differs in different countries and cultures; however, in the absence of objective medical tests, such epidemiologic data are subject to diagnostic and reporting biases, and thus, it is difficult to draw comparative conclusions. The World Health Organization reports that depression is a leading cause of disability worldwide, and other studies find it to be a leading cause of economic loss from noncommunicable disease. These dire social and economic consequences occur because depression is common, often begins early in life, and interferes with cognition, energy, and motivation, which are all necessary to learn in school and to work effectively.

Table 61–1 Symptoms of Mood Disorders

Five or more of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week period and represent a change from

previous functioning. At least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.

1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (eg, feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observations made by others (eg, appears tearful). 2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by

- either subjective account or observation made by others). 3. Significant weight loss when not dieting, or weight gain (eg, a change of &gt;5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or
- increase in appetite nearly every day. 4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective account or as
- observed by others). 9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide
- attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide. Source: Adapted from the American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington,
- DC: American Psychiatric Association.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1502

Bipolar disorder is less common than unipolar

depression, with a prevalence of approximately 1%

worldwide. Its symptoms are relatively constant across

countries and cultures. The incidence of bipolar disorder is equivalent in males and females. Major Depressive Disorder Differs Significantly From Normal Sadness

## Several factors distinguish major depression from transient periods of sadness that may occur in every-

day life and from the grief that often follows a personal

loss. These include the life context in which symptoms occur, their duration and pervasiveness, and their association with physiological, behavioral, and cognitive symptoms (Table 61–1). In healthy people, mood alternates between low and high, with timing and intensity phased appropriately with interpersonal interactions and life events. Mood states that are contextually inappropriate, extreme in amplitude, rigid, or prolonged are suggestive of either depression or mania, depending on their valence. Depressive episodes, whether associated with unipolar or bipolar illness, are characterized by negative mood states such as sadness, anxiety, loss of interests,

or irritability lasting for most of the day, day in and day out, and unrelieved by events that were previously enjoyable. This loss of interest is well expressed

18/12/20 11:46 AM

by Hamlet's complaint, "How weary, stale, flat, and

unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this world!"

When depression is severe, individuals may suffer

intense mental anguish and a pervasive inability to experience pleasure, a condition known as anhedonia. Physiologic symptoms of depression include sleep disturbance, most often insomnia with early morning awakening, but occasionally excessive sleeping; loss

of appetite and weight loss but occasionally excessive eating; decreased interest in sexual activity; and decreased energy. Some severely affected individuals exhibit slowed motor movements, described as psychomotor retardation, whereas others may be agitated, exhibiting such symptoms as pacing. Cognitive symptoms are evident in both the content of thoughts (hopelessness, thoughts of worthlessness and guilt, suicidal thoughts and urges) and in cognitive processes (difficulty concentrating, slow thinking, and poor memory). In the most severe cases of depression, psychotic symptoms may occur, including delusions (unshakable false beliefs that cannot be explained by a person's

culture) and hallucinations. When psychotic symptoms occur in depression, they typically reflect the person's thoughts of being undeserving, worthless, or bad. A severely depressed person might, for example, believe that he is emitting a potent odor because he is rotting from the inside. The most severe outcome of depression is suicide, which represents a significant cause of death worldwide; the World Health Organization estimates that

there are 800,000 deaths by suicide annually. More than 90% of suicides are associated with mental illness, with depression being the leading risk factor, especially when accompanied by substance use disorders. Major Depressive Disorder Often Begins Early in Life

## Major depressive disorder often begins early in life, but first episodes do occur across the life span. Those

who have had a first episode in childhood or adoles-

cence often have a family history of the disorder and have a high likelihood of recurrence. Once a second episode has occurred, a pattern of repeated relapse and remission often sets in. Some people do not recover completely from acute episodes and have chronic, albeit milder, depression, which can be punctuated by acute exacerbations. Chronic depression, even when symptoms are less severe than those of an acute episode, can prove extremely disabling because of longterm erosion of a person's ability to function in life roles. Major depressive disorder in childhood occurs equally in males and females. After puberty, however,

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1503

Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


it occurs more commonly in females; the ratio of

females to males is approximately 2:1 across countries

and cultures.

A Diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder Requires an Episode of Mania

## Bipolar disorder is named for its chief symptom, swings of mood between mania and depression; indeed, the

influential 19th-century psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin

called this condition the manic-depressive insanity. By convention, a diagnosis of bipolar disorder requires at least one episode of mania. Mania is typically associated with recurrent episodes of depression, whereas mania without depression is distinctly uncommon. Manic episodes are typically characterized by elevated mood, although some individuals are predominantly irritable. During manic episodes, indi-

viduals have markedly increased energy, a decreased need for sleep, and occasionally a decreased desire for food (Table 61–2). People with mania are typically impulsive and engage excessively in reward-directed

Table 61–2 Symptoms of a Manic Episode

A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently

elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, and abnormally

and persistently increased goal-directed activity or

- energy, lasting at least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary). B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) have
- persisted and have been present to a significant degree: 1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity. 2. Decreased need for sleep (eg, feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (ie, attention too easily drawn to
- unimportant or irrelevant external stimuli). 6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at
- work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (ie, purposeless non–goal-directed activity).
7. Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for painful consequences (eg, engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual
- indiscretions, or foolish business investments). Source: Adapted from the American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

behaviors, often with poor judgment characterized by

extreme optimism. For example, a person may go on

spending sprees well beyond his or her means or

on uncharacteristic binges of drug and alcohol use or sexual behavior. Self-esteem is typically inflated, often to delusional levels. For example, an individual might falsely believe himself to have extensive influence on events or to be a significant religious figure. In antiquity, mania was described as "a state of raving madness with exalted mood." However, such elevated mood may be brittle, with sudden intrusions of anger, irritability, and aggression. Mania, like depression, affects cognitive processes, often impairing attention and verbal memory. During a manic episode, a person's speech is often rapid, pro-

fuse, and difficult to interrupt. The person may jump quickly from idea to idea, making comprehension of speech difficult. Psychotic symptoms commonly occur during manic episodes and are generally consistent with the person's mood. For example, people with mania may have delusions of possessing special powers or of being objects of adulation. The depressive episodes that occur in bipolar disorder are symptomatically indistinguishable from those in unipolar depression, but are often more diffi-

cult to treat. For example, they are often less responsive to antidepressant medications. Longitudinal studies have found that the most common affective state of bipolar patients between severe acute episodes of mania or depression is not healthy mood (euthymia), as was often taught in older textbooks, but a state of chronic depression. Historically, the concept of bipolar disorder described patients who experienced full manic episodes, which often included psychotic symptoms and

necessitated hospitalization (Table 61–2). In recent decades, diagnostic classifications have added type 2 bipolar disorder in which mild manias (also called hypomanias) alternate with depressive episodes. The manic episodes of type 2 bipolar disorder are, by definition, not accompanied by psychosis or severe enough to require hospitalization. Whether this represents a variant of classic (type 1) bipolar disorder or some other pathophysiology is not yet known, although genetic dissection of mood disorders may offer some clarification in the near future. Bipolar disorder generally begins in young adulthood, but the onset may occur earlier or as late as the fifth decade of life. Many manic episodes often lack

an obvious precipitant; however, sleep deprivation can initiate a manic episode in some individuals with bipolar disorder. For such individuals, travel across time zones or shift work represents a risk. The rate

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1504

of cycling among mania, depression, and periods of

normal mood varies widely among bipolar patients.

Individuals with short, rapid cycles tend to be less

responsive to mood-stabilizing drugs. Anxiety Disorders Represent Significant

Dysregulation of Fear Circuitry

## Anxiety disorders are the most common psychiatric disorders worldwide. In the United States, 28.5% of the

population suffers from one or more anxiety disorders

over the course of their lifetimes. Some anxiety disorders are mild, such as the simple phobias that involve rarely encountered stimuli; others, such as panic disorder or posttraumatic stress disorder, are often highly debilitating based on the severity of symptoms, interference with functioning, and chronicity. Anxiety and fear are related emotional states; both are critical to surviving dangers that might be encountered throughout life. The major distinction is that fear

is a response to threats that are present and clearly signify danger, whereas anxiety is a state of readiness for threats that are less specific either in proximity or timing. The neural circuits of fear and anxiety strongly overlap, as do their physiological, behavioral, cognitive, and affective aspects. Fear is normally a transient adaptive response to danger that, like pain, serves as a survival mechanism. Like pain, fear is alerting and aversive and motivates

more or less immediate behavioral responses. Thus, fear interrupts ongoing behaviors, supplanting them with such responses as avoidance or defensive aggression. To prepare the body to cope physiologically, fear circuitry activates the sympathetic nervous system and causes release of stress hormones. This "fight or flight" response facilitates blood flow to skeletal muscle, increases metabolic activity, and elevates pain thresholds. Like reward and other survival-relevant emo -tional responses, fear strongly facilitates the encoding and consolidation of both implicit and explicit memories that prepare an organism to respond rapidly and effectively to future predictive cues. (Fear circuitry is described in Chapter 42.) Many cognitive and physiological components of anxiety are similar to fear, but typically exhibit lower intensity and a more protracted time course. Anxiety

is adaptive when proportionate to the probability and likely severity of a threat, leading to appropriate levels of arousal, vigilance, and physiological preparedness. Given the dangerous, indeed potentially lethal, consequences of ignoring even ambiguous threat cues, failure to mount appropriate anxiety responses can prove

18/12/20 11:46 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

behaviors, often with poor judgment characterized by

extreme optimism. For example, a person may go on

spending sprees well beyond his or her means or

on uncharacteristic binges of drug and alcohol use or sexual behavior. Self-esteem is typically inflated, often to delusional levels. For example, an individual might falsely believe himself to have extensive influence on events or to be a significant religious figure. In antiquity, mania was described as "a state of raving madness with exalted mood." However, such elevated mood may be brittle, with sudden intrusions of anger, irritability, and aggression. Mania, like depression, affects cognitive processes, often impairing attention and verbal memory. During a manic episode, a person's speech is often rapid, pro-

fuse, and difficult to interrupt. The person may jump quickly from idea to idea, making comprehension of speech difficult. Psychotic symptoms commonly occur during manic episodes and are generally consistent with the person's mood. For example, people with mania may have delusions of possessing special powers or of being objects of adulation. The depressive episodes that occur in bipolar disorder are symptomatically indistinguishable from those in unipolar depression, but are often more diffi-

cult to treat. For example, they are often less responsive to antidepressant medications. Longitudinal studies have found that the most common affective state of bipolar patients between severe acute episodes of mania or depression is not healthy mood (euthymia), as was often taught in older textbooks, but a state of chronic depression. Historically, the concept of bipolar disorder described patients who experienced full manic episodes, which often included psychotic symptoms and

necessitated hospitalization (Table 61–2). In recent decades, diagnostic classifications have added type 2 bipolar disorder in which mild manias (also called hypomanias) alternate with depressive episodes. The manic episodes of type 2 bipolar disorder are, by definition, not accompanied by psychosis or severe enough to require hospitalization. Whether this represents a variant of classic (type 1) bipolar disorder or some other pathophysiology is not yet known, although genetic dissection of mood disorders may offer some clarification in the near future. Bipolar disorder generally begins in young adulthood, but the onset may occur earlier or as late as the fifth decade of life. Many manic episodes often lack

an obvious precipitant; however, sleep deprivation can initiate a manic episode in some individuals with bipolar disorder. For such individuals, travel across time zones or shift work represents a risk. The rate

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1504

of cycling among mania, depression, and periods of

normal mood varies widely among bipolar patients.

Individuals with short, rapid cycles tend to be less

responsive to mood-stabilizing drugs. Anxiety Disorders Represent Significant

Dysregulation of Fear Circuitry

## Anxiety disorders are the most common psychiatric disorders worldwide. In the United States, 28.5% of the

population suffers from one or more anxiety disorders

over the course of their lifetimes. Some anxiety disorders are mild, such as the simple phobias that involve rarely encountered stimuli; others, such as panic disorder or posttraumatic stress disorder, are often highly debilitating based on the severity of symptoms, interference with functioning, and chronicity. Anxiety and fear are related emotional states; both are critical to surviving dangers that might be encountered throughout life. The major distinction is that fear

is a response to threats that are present and clearly signify danger, whereas anxiety is a state of readiness for threats that are less specific either in proximity or timing. The neural circuits of fear and anxiety strongly overlap, as do their physiological, behavioral, cognitive, and affective aspects. Fear is normally a transient adaptive response to danger that, like pain, serves as a survival mechanism. Like pain, fear is alerting and aversive and motivates

more or less immediate behavioral responses. Thus, fear interrupts ongoing behaviors, supplanting them with such responses as avoidance or defensive aggression. To prepare the body to cope physiologically, fear circuitry activates the sympathetic nervous system and causes release of stress hormones. This "fight or flight" response facilitates blood flow to skeletal muscle, increases metabolic activity, and elevates pain thresholds. Like reward and other survival-relevant emo -tional responses, fear strongly facilitates the encoding and consolidation of both implicit and explicit memories that prepare an organism to respond rapidly and effectively to future predictive cues. (Fear circuitry is described in Chapter 42.) Many cognitive and physiological components of anxiety are similar to fear, but typically exhibit lower intensity and a more protracted time course. Anxiety

is adaptive when proportionate to the probability and likely severity of a threat, leading to appropriate levels of arousal, vigilance, and physiological preparedness. Given the dangerous, indeed potentially lethal, consequences of ignoring even ambiguous threat cues, failure to mount appropriate anxiety responses can prove

18/12/20 11:46 AM

highly maladaptive. However, excessive contextually

inappropriate and prolonged vigilance, tension, and

physiological activation can be the basis of distressing

and disabling anxiety disorders or anxiety symptoms that may accompany depression. Risk factors for anxiety disorders include a person's genetic background, developmental experience, and lessons learned not only from direct experience but also taught by families, peers, schools, and other institutions. Cues that elicit anxiety may be environmental or interoceptive (ie, arising from within the body, such as abdominal discomfort or heart palpitations). Social

cues and social situations can be a major source of anxiety. In humans, anxiety states can also be initiated by trains of thought that elicit memories or imagination of danger. Anxiety can also arise from stimuli that are processed unconsciously because of their brevity or ambiguity, and the resulting emotion might then be experienced as arising spontaneously. In contrast to fear, which is initiated and terminated by the presence or termination of clear stimuli denoting threat, anxiety has a more variable time course. Anxiety states may be prolonged if the potential for danger or harm is longlasting or if there is no clear safety signal. Anxiety disorders and the anxiety that may accompany major depression are associated with diverse symptoms. Affected individuals may develop exces-

sive preoccupation with possible threats and attentional biases toward cues interpreted as threatening. Such cognitive states are often associated with persistent worry, tension, and vigilance. Common physiological symptoms include hyperarousal, as evidenced by a low threshold for being startled, difficulty sleeping, and sympathetic nervous system activation, including a rapid, pounding heartbeat. Individuals with anxiety may become exquisitely aware of their heartbeat or breathing, which can become a source of preoccupation and worry in their own right. Sympathetic nervous system activation may reach extreme levels of intensity during a panic attack, one of the most severe manifestations of anxiety. In anxiety disorders, cognitive, physiological, and behavioral responses that would be adaptive in the face of a serious threat may be maladaptively acti-

vated by innocuous stimuli, may be inappropriately intense for the situation, and may have a protracted time course in which safety signals fail to terminate the symptoms. Affected individuals may avoid places, people, or experiences that, although objectively safe, have become associated with perceptions of threats or the experience of anxiety. When severe, such avoidance can impair the ability of affected individuals to function in different capacities or roles.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1505

Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


Because there are no biomarkers or objective medi-

cal tests for particular constellations of anxiety symp-

toms, current psychiatric classifications such as the

fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) classify anxiety disorders based on clinical histories, such as the nature, intensity, and time course of symptoms, the role of external cues in triggering episodes, and associated symptoms. The DSM-5 divides pathological anxiety syndromes into several distinct disorders: panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia), and simple phobias. For heuristic purposes, these disorders are discussed below, but current evidence from long-term clinical observation and from family, twin, and epidemiological studies does not support dividing anxiety symptoms into discrete nonoverlapping categories. Rather, the evidence suggests that pathological anxiety symptoms and symptoms of depression might be better conceptualized as a continuum or spectrum in which individuals experience varying symptoms that cross current DSM boundaries. Consistent with the concept of a symptom spectrum, anxiety disorders and depression do not often occur together across generations in families as distinct

DSM-5 categories; instead, diverse patterns of anxiety and depressive symptoms are typically observed among affected family members. Twin studies that compare concordance for traits in monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs find significant shared genetic risk across multiple anxiety disorders and major depression. In addition, epidemiological studies find that individuals diagnosed with one categorical DSM-5 anxiety disorder, during, for example, teen years, have a high probability of developing new anxiety or depressive symptoms over the next decade that could result in the person being diagnosed with multiple disorders based on DSM-5 classifications. The high frequency at which putatively distinct DSM-5 anxiety disorders and depression co-occur and the results of family and twin studies suggest significant sharing of etiologic factors and pathogenic mechanisms among anxiety disorders and major depression. Nevertheless, individual disorders that are listed in DSM-5 are briefly described below. Panic attacks are a severe manifestation of anxiety. They are characterized by discrete periods (that can last for many minutes) of intense foreboding, a sense

of doom, fear of losing control over oneself, or fear of death. They are associated with prominent bodily symptoms such as heart palpitations, inability to catch one's breath, sweating, paresthesias, and dizziness (Table 61–3).

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Table 61–3 Symptoms of a Panic Attack

## A discrete period of intense fear or discomfort in which

four (or more) of the following symptoms develop

abruptly and reach a peak within 10 minutes.

1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate 2. Sweating 3. Trembling or shaking

4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering

5. Feeling of choking

6. Chest pain or discomfort
7. Nausea or abdominal distress

8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint

9. Chills or heat sensations
10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
11. Derealization (feelings or unreality) or depersonaliza-
4. tion (being detached from oneself)
12. Fear of losing control or "going crazy"
13. Fear of dying Source: Adapted from the American Psychiatric Association.
2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.

Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.

Panic attacks often give rise to anxiety about future

episodes such that the contexts in which attacks have

occurred can become phobic stimuli that trigger sub-

sequent attacks (fear conditioning). As a result, some severely affected individuals restrict their activities to avoid situations or places in which panic attacks have occurred or from which they fear they might not be able to escape should they experience an attack. The most severely affected may develop generalized phobic avoidance, leading them to become housebound, a state described as agoraphobia. Current diagnostic classification systems such as the DSM-5 define panic disorder based on the number and frequency of attacks and whether or not a phobic trigger can be identified. Such detailed criteria lack a strong empirical basis, but it is certainly the case that individuals who have recurrent panic attacks along with other anxiety symptoms are not only highly distressed but may also be significantly disabled. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) follows an experience of severe danger or injury. Under different names and descriptions, including shell shock, a term

coined during World War I, PTSD has long been recognized as a result of combat. More recently, civilian traumas such as assault, rape, or automobile crashes have been recognized as potential causes of PTSD. The current approach to PTSD was formalized by the American Psychiatric Association based on the experience of Vietnam War veterans.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1506

PTSD is initiated by a traumatic experience. Its

cardinal symptoms include intrusive reexperiencing of

the traumatic episode, typically initiated by cues such

as sounds, images, or other reminders of the trauma. For example, a person who has been assaulted might respond potently to an unexpected touch from behind. Such episodes are often characterized by activation of the sympathetic nervous system and, when severe, may be characterized by "fight or flight" responses. The reexperiencing of a traumatic event may also occur in the form of nightmares. Other symptoms of PTSD include emotional numbness that may interfere with relationships and social interactions, insomnia, chronic hyperarousal including excessive vigilance, sympathetic nervous system activation, and an exaggerated startle response to an innocuous stimulus such as a touch or sound. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is diagnosed when a person suffers chronic worry and vigilance not warranted by circumstances. The worry is accompa-

nied by physiological symptoms such as heightened sympathetic nervous system activation and motor tension. GAD commonly co-occurs with major depressive disorder. Social anxiety disorder is characterized by a persistent fear of social situations, especially situations in which one is exposed to the scrutiny of others. The

affected person has an intense fear of acting in a way that will prove humiliating. Stage fright is a form of social anxiety that is limited to circumstances of performance, such as public speaking. Social anxiety disorder can lead to avoidance of verbal classroom participation or communicating with others at work and can therefore prove disabling as well as distressing. Simple phobias consist of intense and inappropriately excessive fear of specific stimuli, such as elevators, flying, heights, or spiders.

Both Genetic and Environmental Risk Factors

Contribute to Mood and Anxiety Disorders

## Bipolar disorder, major depression, and anxiety disorders all run in families. Twin studies that compare

the rate of concordance of monozygotic and dizygotic

twin pairs demonstrate significant heritabilities among these disorders, where heritability represents the percentage of the variation in a phenotype explained by genetic variation. Among mood and anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder has the highest heritability (70%–80%); major depression and anxiety disorders exhibit lower but still significant heritabilities (approximately 35%), with greater roles for developmental

18/12/20 11:46 AM

and environmental risk factors. Although there is an

important role for genes in the pathogenesis of mood

and anxiety disorders, all of them exhibit non-Mendelian

patterns of transmission across generations, including frequent co-occurrence of major depression and anxiety disorders. Such patterns reflect the complexity of genetic and nongenetic risk factors. Molecular genetic studies aimed at discovering the precise DNA sequence variants (alleles) that predispose to mood and anxiety disorders have been ini-

tiated. Such studies are challenging because the risk architecture of these, and indeed all, common psychiatric disorders is highly polygenic, meaning that population risk appears to involve many thousands of common and rare alleles linked to or contained within many hundreds of genes. Unlike some neurologic disorders such as Huntington disease, there is no "depression gene" or "anxiety gene." Disease-associated alleles confer small additive effects on the risk of an illness. The risk for any given individual results from genetic loading (comprised of diverse combinations of disease-associated alleles) acting in concert with developmental and environmental factors. This polygenic architecture explains non-Mendelian patterns of transmission and the diverse combinations of depressive and anxiety symptoms observed within families and across populations. The lack of objective diagnostic tests for mood and anxiety disorders means that any study cohort is likely to have some proportion of diagnostic misclassification.

As a result, the search for common disease-associated variants by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and rare disease-associated variants by DNA sequencing requires significant statistical power conferred by very large cohorts and by meta-analyses conducted across multiple cohorts. Early results of GWAS have been reported for major depression and bipolar disorder; in both cases, several significant genome-wide loci have been found to date, but not yet enough to identify molecular pathways of pathogenesis with any certainty. Whole-exome sequencing (ie, DNA sequencing of all genomic regions that encode proteins) and whole-genome sequencing are being conducted for bipolar disorder. The highly polygenic risk architecture of mood and anxiety disorders means that there is no diagnostic value in testing for one or a few risk gene variants that

might be associated with these disorders. Rather, polygenic risk scores (PRS), based on the sum of all genetic risk variants for a trait, are emerging as useful tools to stratify individuals in epidemiological and clinical studies by severity of genetic risk. A discrepant PRS within a clinical cohort, eg, showing low depression

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1507

Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


risk in a study of people with major depression, would

suggest misclassification. It is important to emphasize

that the polygenic nature of risk for mood and anxiety

disorders and the significant contribution of environmental risk factors mean that, like any genetic test, the PRS provides only a probability. As more is learned, the PRS can be combined with other measures to yield a more predictive risk score, just as modern cardiac risk models increasingly include

genetic measures, smoking history, lipid levels, and blood pressure. For mood and anxiety disorders, one type of measure that shows early promise is identification of intrinsic patterns of neural connectivity derived from resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; imaging conducted when subjects are not engaged in task performance). Differing patterns of connectivity could potentially distinguish among different forms of disorder. Epidemiological evidence has identified significant developmental risk factors for major depression and anxiety disorders. The best documented is a his-

tory of physical or sexual abuse early in life, serious child neglect, or other early, severe stressors. Investigations of such early stressors have focused on possible roles for altered reactivity of the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Studies of early stress in animal models suggest that epigenetic regulation of gene expression may have a role in altering developmental trajectories. Such results cannot be readily followed up in humans because of lack of access to human brain tissue and thus remain hypothetical. Other risk factors for depression and anxiety disorders include alcohol and other substance use disorders and the presence of other psychiatric disorders, such as

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, learning disorders, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. There is also evidence that alcoholism and other substance abuse disorders may be initiated by misguided attempts at self-medication of depression or anxiety, in turn worsening the underlying condition. Environmental factors that may trigger new episodes of depression or anxiety include life transitions such as marriage, a new job, or retirement. Serious ill-

ness, whether acute or chronic, is also associated with the onset of major depression and anxiety. Some neurological disorders are associated with an elevated risk of depression, including Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis, and stroke. Some prescribed medications, such as interferons, also frequently trigger depression. When major depression accompanies a chronic illness such as type 2 diabetes or cardiovascular disease, the overall medical outcomes are worse, as a result of both the physiological

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

effects of depression, such as increased release of stress

hormones (see below) and decreased motivation to

engage in rehabilitative regimens.

Depression and Stress Share Overlapping

Neural Mechanisms

## Depression and responses to stress exhibit complex but significant interactions. As already noted, severe

childhood adversity is a developmental risk factor for

depression; moreover, depressive episodes may be initiated by a stressful experience. Conversely, the experience of depression is itself stressful because of the suffering it causes and its negative effects on functioning. Symptomatically, depression shares several physiological features with chronic stress, including changes in appetite, sleep, and energy. Both major depression and chronic stress are associated with persistent activation of the HPA axis (Figure 61–1). Many but not all individuals with major depression and many in the depressed phase of bipolar disorder exhibit excess synthesis and secretion of the

glucocorticoid stress hormone cortisol and the factors that regulate it, corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). In a healthy state, a transient increase in cortisol secretion, as occurs in response to acute stress, shifts the body to a catabolic state (making glucose available to confront the stressor or threat), increases subjective energy levels, sharpens cognition, and may increase confidence. However, a chronic increase in glucocorticoids may contribute to depression-like symptoms. For example, many people with Cushing disease (in which pituitary tumors secrete excess ACTH, leading to excess cortisol) experience symptoms of depression. Feedback mechanisms within the HPA axis nor -mally permit cortisol (or exogenously administered glucocorticoids) to inhibit CRH and ACTH secretion Amygdala

+

Hippocampus

\_

<!-- image -->

Regulation

of brain and

peripheral

function

rons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus synthe-

size and release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), the key

and therefore to suppress additional cortisol synthesis and secretion. In approximately half of people with major depression, this feedback system is impaired; their HPA axis becomes resistant to suppression even by potent synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone. Although readily measurable disturbances of the HPA axis have not proven sensitive or specific enough to be used as a diagnostic test for depression, the observed abnormalities suggest strongly that a pathologically activated stress response is often an important component of depression. The relationship of stress with depression has led to the development of several chronic stress paradigms in rodent models of depression. The reliance on

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1508

regulatory peptide in the hormonal cascade activated by stress. The CRH neurons have a circadian pattern of secretion, and the stimulatory effects of stress on CRH synthesis and secretion are superimposed on this basal circadian pattern. Excitatory fibers from the amygdala convey information about stressful stimuli that activates CRH neurons; inhibitory fibers descend from the hippocampus onto the paraventricular nucleus. CRH enters the hypophyseal portal system and stimulates the corticotropic cells in the anterior pituitary that synthesize and release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The released ACTH enters the systemic circulation and stimulates the adrenal cortex to release glucocorticoids. In humans, the major glucocorticoid is cortisol; in rodents, it is corticosterone. Both cortisol and synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone act at the level of the pituitary and hypothalamus to inhibit further release of ACTH and CRH, respectively. The feedback inhibition by glucocorticoids is attenuated in major depression and the depressed phase of bipolar disorder. (Adapted, with permission, from Nestler et al. 2015.)

18/12/20 11:46 AM

stress-induced syndromes in these animal models has

been strengthened by the observation that many anti-

depressant drugs reverse stress-induced changes in

physiology or behavior in these animals. However, the degree to which animals subjected to diverse chronic stressors actually model the disease mechanisms underlying depression in human beings remains unknown. Concern about overreliance on stress-based and other rodent models is indicated by the failure to identify new antidepressant mechanisms despite more than 50 years of trying. Drug screens using such models have only identified molecules with actions similar to prototype antidepressant drugs that were first identified by their unexpected psychotropic effects on humans . Dysfunctions of Human Brain Structures

and Circuits Involved in Mood and Anxiety

Disorders Can Be Identified by Neuroimaging

## Investigation of human brain regions and the neural circuitry involved in mood and anxiety disorders has

Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


differences in patterns of intrinsic connectivity, specifi-

cally within neural circuits that regulate "top down"

control of cognition and emotion—the "cognitive con-

trol network"—and in circuits that process significant emotional and motivational stimuli—"the salience net -work" (Figure 61–2). Despite the need for replication, these findings are noteworthy because they are consistent with results from task-based imaging studies of humans (eg, studies of fear conditioning) and animal studies that investigate responses to aversive stimuli. In healthy human subjects, regions of the amygdala are activated by threatening stimuli and during fear conditioning, such as pairing a previously neutral tone

with a mild shock. Beginning with the work of Charles Darwin, human faces expressing fear have been recognized to elicit anxiety responses across diverse human cultures, presumably as a mechanism to communicate the presence of danger among members of a group. The effects of fearful and other emotion-expressing faces on measurements of autonomic activity and brain activity measured by fMRI or by electroencephalogra-

relied on noninvasive structural and functional neuro

imaging, neurophysiologic testing, and postmortem analyses. More recently, information is being gleaned from neuroimaging of patients being treated with deep brain stimulation. Identification of Abnormally Functioning Neural Circuits Helps Explain Symptoms

and May Suggest Treatments

## Functional neuroimaging and electrophysiological studies are being pursued in order to elucidate abnor-

malities in circuit activity and in patterns of intrinsic

connectivity in mood and anxiety disorders. Given the heterogeneity of major depression, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders defined by current diagnostic methods, it has been challenging to identify robust and replicable abnormalities. In addition, the use of diverse cognitive and emotional tasks to experimentally probe mood and anxiety disorders has limited researchers' ability to replicate and confirm findings. Overcoming the resulting uncertainties will require larger numbers of subjects, application of data standards that permit meta-analyses, and increasingly, methods such as use of the PRSs to stratify subjects. Despite current limitations, fMRI and electrophysiological studies of mood and anxiety disorders have begun to provide initial empirical leads about

-phy have been studied in subjects with anxiety disorders or with major depression. In one such paradigm, fearful faces are shown very briefly (33 ms) while the subject is in an MRI scanner. This presentation is followed by a neutral face (referred to as backward masking). Under such circumstances, subjects report that they have no awareness of having seen the fearful face. Yet they exhibit an altered galvanic skin response, a measure of sympathetic activation, as well as activation of the basal amygdala, the amygdala region that processes sensory inputs and that responds selectively to threat. Several functional neuroimaging studies of individuals with PTSD, other anxiety disorders, and major depression have demonstrated heightened activity in the amygdala, activation even to innocuous stimuli, and persistence of amygdala activity in contrast to normal patterns of adaptation (Figure 61–3). Functional neuroimaging studies of anxiety disorders and major depression have also found decreased activity in prefrontal cortical regions that are intercon-

circuit abnormalities in mood and anxiety disorders. Resting-state fMRI studies comparing subjects with major depression and healthy control subjects suggest

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1509

nected with the basal amygdala. Studies of animals with prefrontal cortical lesions demonstrate that projections from the prefrontal cortex to the basal amygdala are necessary for cognitive control over aversive information. In individuals suffering from anxiety disorders or major depression, reduced activation of the prefrontal cortex by aversive stimuli is consistent with cognitive testing that demonstrates decreased cognitive control and might contribute to excessive and persistent anxiety and other negative emotions. Electrophysiological and functional neuroimaging studies of both major depression and bipolar disorder

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System VLPFC

DLPFC

<!-- image -->

and cognitive control. Statistical analysis (independent compo- Salience processing Executive control

nent analysis) applied to resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data identifies separable networks that compute emotional salience (red-orange) and regulate cognitive control/ executive function (blue). The emotional salience network links dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and frontoinsular cortex (FI) with subcortical structures involved in emotion. The cognitive control network links the dorsolateral prefrontal (DLPFC) and parietal cortices and several subcortical structures. The

(Abbreviations: AI, anterior insula; antTHAL, anterior thalamus;

dCN, dorsal caudate nucleus; DMPFC, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; dmTHAL, dorsomedial thalamus; HT, hypothalamus; PAG, periaqueductal gray matter; Pre-SMA, pre–supplementary motor area; Put, putamen; SLEA, sublenticular extended amygdala; SN/VTA, substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area of the midbrain; TP, temporal pole; VLPFC, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Seeley et al. 2007. Copyright © 2007 Society for Neuroscience.)

the fearful face. Under these conditions, the basolateral region

of the amygdala is more strongly activated in individuals with

<!-- image -->

projected images while being scanned by magnetic resonance

imaging. When a fearful face is presented for a very brief time followed by presentation of a neutral face, a protocol called

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1510

anxiety disorder than in normal individuals. (Reproduced, with permission, from Etkin et al. 2004.)

18/12/20 11:46 AM

have shown abnormal functioning of the rostral and

ventral subdivisions of the anterior cingulate cortex

(ACC), a region of prefrontal cortex that participates

in the emotional salience network. The rostral and ventral ACC have extensive connections with the hippocampus, amygdala, orbital prefrontal cortex, anterior insula, and nucleus accumbens and are involved in the integration of emotion, cognition, and autonomic nervous system function. The caudal subdivision of the ACC is involved in cognitive processes involved in control of behavior; it has connections with dorsal regions of the prefrontal cortex, secondary motor cortex, and posterior cingulate cortex. Although abnormal function in both subdivisions of the ACC has been observed in depressive episodes, the most consistent abnormality observed in major

depression and in the depressed phase of bipolar disorder is increased activity in the rostral and ventral subdivisions, especially in the subgenual region ventral to the genu (or "knee") of the corpus callosum. In a study using positron emission tomography, effective treatment of major depression with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants was correlated with decreased activity in the rostral ACC, whereas selfinduced sadness in healthy subjects increased activity (Figure 61–4). Based on such studies, the rostral anterior (subgenual) cingulate cortex has been used as a target for electrode placement in deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant major depression, which is operationally defined as depressive illness that has Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


been unresponsive to antidepressant medication and

psychotherapy.

Functional abnormalities of brain reward circuitry

may also play a role in the symptoms of mood disorders. The reward circuitry comprises the dopaminergic

projections from the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain to forebrain targets, including the nucleus accumbens, habenula, prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala (Chapter 43). Under normal conditions, these pathways are involved in the valuation of rewards (eg, palatable food, sexual activity, and social interactions) and in motivating the necessary behavior to obtain them. Reward processing appears to be abnormal in depression, based on such symptoms as decreased interest in previously pleasurable activities, decreased motivation, and, when depression is severe, the inability to experience pleasure (anhedonia). Although less well studied, reward processing is also likely abnormal in mania, which is characterized by excessive engagement in goal-directed behaviors, even when they are maladaptive, such as uncontrolled spending, dangerous drug use, and promiscuous sexual activity. In a recent analysis of resting-state fMRI, data showed that patients with major depression could be stratified based on connectivity patterns that cor-

related with their degree of anhedonia and anxiety. However, although modulation of the reward circuitry has been considered as a possible treatment for major depression, it has proven difficult in practice. For example, drugs known to activate this circuitry by

Induced sadness in healthy subjects Depression recovery with SSRI

Figure 61–4 Activity in the rostral anterior (subgenual)

cingulate cortex is increased by sadness and decreased by

successful treatment of major depression with an antidepres-

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

sant. (Reproduced, with permission, from Mayberg et al. 1997.) Left . Healthy volunteers provided a script of their saddest memory that was later used to generate transient sadness while undergoing positron emission tomography (PET). The rostral anterior cingulate cortex was activated (red pseudo-color

in the sagittal section of the human brain) was activated when the sad story was read. Cg25 is an alternative nomenclature

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1511

for the cingulate gyrus, Brodmann area 25. The PET ligand was

oxygen-15–labeled water, used to measure cerebral blood flow

as a proxy for brain activity.

Right . Elevated metabolism in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex was confirmed in subjects with major depression. Following successful treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake

inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressant, brain activity in Cg25 decreased (blue pseudo-color in the sagittal section of the human brain). The PET ligand was 2-deoxyglucose, used to measure cerebral metabolism as a proxy for brain activity.

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

increasing synaptic dopamine, such as amphetamine

and cocaine, pose a high risk of overuse and addic-

tion. More recently, tests of drugs that release reward In rodents, stressful or aversive treatments or administration of glucocorticoids inhibits the prolif- eration of granule cell precursors and thus suppresses

circuits from inhibitory control, such as kappa opiate receptor antagonists, have been initiated in patients with major depression. A Decrease in Hippocampal Volume Is Associated With Mood Disorders

## The best-established structural abnormality in mood disorders is decreased hippocampal volume in indi-

viduals with major depression compared with healthy

subjects. Recent studies of patients with major depression and bipolar disorder have found hippocampal volume loss in unmedicated subjects in regions of the cerebral cortex associated with the control of emo tion. Such studies, which still need replication, show both overlapping and nonoverlapping patterns of volume loss in patients with major depression compared with bipolar disorder. Volume reductions observed in patients with major depression correlate with the duration of depressive episodes when controlling for duration of medication use. These findings suggest that in major depression the volume losses result from persistent illness and do not represent an antecedent risk factor. Some researchers have hypothesized that elevated cortisol levels in patients with major depression might be associated with reduced hippocampal volumes. Reduced hippocampal volume has also been reported in cases of PTSD. In contrast with major depression, studies of monozygotic twins discordant

-normal rates of neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Antidepressants, including the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, exert an opposite effect, increasing the rate of neurogenesis. Thus, excess secretion of glucocorticoid stress hormones, as occurs in depression, could cause hippocampal volume loss by inhibiting neurogenesis over time. Because glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus are required for inhibitory feedback to hypothalamic neurons that synthesize and release CRH, impairments of hippocampal function could further impair feedback regulation of the HPA axis, creating a vicious cycle. The hippocampus permits the brain to resolve differences among closely related stimuli (pattern separation) and provides contextual information that

for PTSD suggest that small hippocampi precede onset of the disorder and may thus represent a risk factor instead of a result of the disorder. The acquired loss of hippocampal volume in major depression could result from loss of dendrites and dendritic spines, from decreased cell numbers (neu-

rons or glia), or both. Given the relationship of stress and depression, excessive cortisol secretion could play a causal role in either type of loss. A decrease in hippocampal cell number could be explained by the fact that stress and elevated glucocorticoid levels suppress adult hippocampal neurogenesis, as shown in studies of several animal species. In several mammals, including humans, new granule cells within the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus are produced during adult life. Studies of rodents have

shown that these new neurons can be incorporated into functional neural circuits where they initially exhibit heightened structural and synaptic plasticity. A role for cell death as a balance to adult neurogenesis is less well studied.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1512

facilitates interpretation of the survival significance of a stimulus. Such information is needed by the organism to accurately identify threats that are signaled within a stream of complex sensory inputs. In animal studies, hippocampal lesions increase anxiety responses; it is thought that the resulting impairment of pattern separation and processing of contextual information permits threat-related memories to generalize inappropriately and thus to become associated with innocuous stimuli. Physiological and behavioral evidence suggests that newborn neurons within the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus play a particularly important role in pattern separation. Thus, inhibition of neurogenesis might contribute to anxiety symptoms that often accompany major depression, and abnormally low hippocampal volumes might increase the risk of PTSD. Major Depression and Anxiety Disorders

Can Be Treated Effectively

## Major depressive disorder can be treated effectively with antidepressant drugs, cognitive psychotherapy,

and electroconvulsive therapy. Major depressive dis-

order refractory to other interventions is being treated experimentally with deep brain stimulation targeted to the subgenual prefrontal cortex and other targets, including the nucleus accumbens. Current Antidepressant Drugs Affect Monoaminergic Neural Systems

## Named for their first clinical indication, the antidepressant drugs have broader utility than suggested by their

name. Indeed, antidepressants are also the first-line

18/12/20 11:46 AM

drugs for the treatment of anxiety disorders. Along

with frequent co-occurrence and sharing of risk factors

and some neural circuits, the overlap in effective treat-

ment modalities is further evidence that mood and anxiety disorders are related. All widely used antidepressant drugs increase activity in monoaminergic systems in the brain, most significantly serotonin and norepinephrine, although

some antidepressants exert modest effects on dopamine as well. The relevant monoamine neurotransmitters— serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine—are synthesized by cells that reside within brain stem nuclei (Chapter 40). Serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons in the pons and medulla project widely to highly diverse terminal fields in brain regions that include the hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, basal ganglia, and cerebral cortex (Figures 61–5 and 61–6). Dopaminergic

A Pathways

Striatum To hippocampus Deep cerebellar nuclei

<!-- image -->

Figure 61–5 The major serotonergic systems in the brain

arise in the raphe nuclei of the brain stem. Serotonin is syn-

thesized in a group of brain stem nuclei called the raphe nuclei.

These neurons project throughout the neuraxis, ranging from the forebrain to the spinal cord. The serotonergic projections are the most massive and diffuse of the monoaminergic systems, with single serotonergic neurons innervating hundreds of target neurons. (Adapted, with permission, from Heimer 1995.)

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1513

Thalamus Cingulate gyrus Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


neurons in the ventral tegmental area and substantia

nigra pars compacta of the midbrain project to some-

what less widespread areas. Ventral tegmental neu-

rons project to the hippocampus, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, and prefrontal cortex; substantia nigra neurons innervate the caudate and putamen. The widely divergent projections of these monoaminergic neurons permit them to influence functions such as arousal, attention, vigilance, motivation, and other cognitive and emotional states that require integration of multiple brain regions. Serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine are synthesized from amino acid precursors and packaged into synaptic vesicles for release. Monoamines in the

cytoplasm that are outside of vesicles are metabolized by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO), which is associated with the outer leaflet of mitochondrial

B Targets Neocortex Caudate nucleus and putamen Globus pallidus Hippocampus forebrain

<!-- image -->

groups close to the midline of the brain stem and extending

along its length. In the drawing here, they are shown in more distinct rostral and caudal groups. The rostral raphe nuclei project to a large number of forebrain structures. B. This coronal view of the brain illustrates some of the major structures innervated by serotonergic raphe nuclei neurons.

18/12/20 11:46 AM
drugs for the treatment of anxiety disorders. Along

with frequent co-occurrence and sharing of risk factors

and some neural circuits, the overlap in effective treat-

ment modalities is further evidence that mood and anxiety disorders are related. All widely used antidepressant drugs increase activity in monoaminergic systems in the brain, most significantly serotonin and norepinephrine, although

some antidepressants exert modest effects on dopamine as well. The relevant monoamine neurotransmitters— serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine—are synthesized by cells that reside within brain stem nuclei (Chapter 40). Serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons in the pons and medulla project widely to highly diverse terminal fields in brain regions that include the hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, basal ganglia, and cerebral cortex (Figures 61–5 and 61–6). Dopaminergic

A Pathways

Striatum To hippocampus Deep cerebellar nuclei

<!-- image -->

Figure 61–5 The major serotonergic systems in the brain

arise in the raphe nuclei of the brain stem. Serotonin is syn-

thesized in a group of brain stem nuclei called the raphe nuclei.

These neurons project throughout the neuraxis, ranging from the forebrain to the spinal cord. The serotonergic projections are the most massive and diffuse of the monoaminergic systems, with single serotonergic neurons innervating hundreds of target neurons. (Adapted, with permission, from Heimer 1995.)

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1513

Thalamus Cingulate gyrus Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


neurons in the ventral tegmental area and substantia

nigra pars compacta of the midbrain project to some-

what less widespread areas. Ventral tegmental neu-

rons project to the hippocampus, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, and prefrontal cortex; substantia nigra neurons innervate the caudate and putamen. The widely divergent projections of these monoaminergic neurons permit them to influence functions such as arousal, attention, vigilance, motivation, and other cognitive and emotional states that require integration of multiple brain regions. Serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine are synthesized from amino acid precursors and packaged into synaptic vesicles for release. Monoamines in the

cytoplasm that are outside of vesicles are metabolized by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO), which is associated with the outer leaflet of mitochondrial

B Targets Neocortex Caudate nucleus and putamen Globus pallidus Hippocampus forebrain

<!-- image -->

groups close to the midline of the brain stem and extending

along its length. In the drawing here, they are shown in more distinct rostral and caudal groups. The rostral raphe nuclei project to a large number of forebrain structures. B. This coronal view of the brain illustrates some of the major structures innervated by serotonergic raphe nuclei neurons.

18/12/20 11:46 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A Pathways

Neocortex Thalamus To hippocampus Cerebellar cortex Cingulate gyrus

<!-- image -->

Figure 61–6 The major noradrenergic projection of the fore-

brain arises in the locus ceruleus. (Adapted, with permission,

from Heimer 1995.)

A. Norepinephrine is synthesized in several brain stem nuclei, the largest of which is the nucleus locus ceruleus, a pigmented nucleus located just beneath the floor of the fourth ventricle in the rostrolateral pons. A lateral midsagittal view demonstrates the course of the major noradrenergic (NA) membranes. After vesicular release, monoamine neu-

rotransmitters bind synaptic receptors to exert their

biological effect or are cleared from the synapse by

specific transporter proteins located on the presynaptic cell membrane. The most widely used antidepressant drugs fall into several major groupings, which affect monoaminergic neurons and their targets (Figure 61–7). The

MAO inhibitors discovered in the 1950s, such as phenelzine and tranylcypromine, are effective against both depression and anxiety disorders but are rarely used today because of their side effects. MAO inhibitors block the capacity of MAO to break down norepinephrine, serotonin, or dopamine in presynaptic terminals, thus making extra neurotransmitter available for packaging into vesicles and for release. Two forms of MAO, types A and B, are found in the brain. Type A is also found in the gut and liver, where it

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1514

B Targets Neocortex Hippocampus Medial forebrain bundle Nuclei of locus ceruleus

<!-- image -->

the forebrain and also into the cerebellum and spinal cord;

axons from noradrenergic nuclei in the lateral brain stem tegmentum project to the spinal cord, hypothalamus, amygdala, and ventral forebrain. B. A coronal section shows the major targets of neurons from the locus ceruleus.

catabolizes bioactive amines that are present in foods.

Inhibition of MAO-A permits bioactive amines such

as tyramine to enter the bloodstream from foods that

contain it in high concentrations, such as aged meats and cheeses. Transporters shuttle these amines into the terminals of sympathetic neurons, where they can displace endogenous vesicular norepinephrine and epinephrine into the cytoplasm, leading to nonvesicular release that causes significant elevations of blood pressure. The tricyclic antidepressants, also first identified in the mid-1950s, include imipramine, amitriptyline, and desipramine; these block the norepinephrine

transporter (NET), the serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT), or both. These drugs are effective in treating both depression and anxiety disorders. However, in addition to their therapeutic targets, the older tricyclic drugs also block many neurotransmitter receptors,

18/12/20 11:47 AM

including the muscarinic acetylcholine, histamine H

and α


1,

noradrenergic receptors, producing a panoply

of side effects.

The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, first approved in the 1980s, have no greater efficacy than

the older tricyclic antidepressants and MAO inhibitors but are widely used because they have milder side effects and are far safer if taken in overdose. As their name implies, they selectively inhibit SERT. They are effective for major depressive disorder and many anxiety disorders. In high doses, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are also effective for symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Selective norepinephrine and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors have also been developed; these drugs have side effect profiles similar to those of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors but are useful for some patients who do not benefit from inhibition of SERT alone. Despite knowledge of the initial molecular targets that mediate the effects of antidepressant drugs, MAO or monoamine transporters, the ultimate molecular

mechanisms by which they relieve depression remain unknown. One major challenge to understanding the therapeutic action of these drugs is the delay in their therapeutic effects. Although antidepressant drugs bind to and inhibit MAO, NET, or SERT with their first dose, several weeks of treatment are typically required to observe a lifting of depressive symptoms. Several hypotheses have been put forward to explain this delay. One is that a slow buildup of newly synthesized proteins alters the responsiveness of neu-

rons in a manner that treats the depression. Another is that increases in the levels of synaptic transmission of serotonin or norepinephrine rapidly increase plasticity in different emotion-processing circuits and that the latency to therapeutic benefit reflects the time it takes for new experiences to alter synaptic weights. A third hypothesis is that antidepressant efficacy is mediated in part by enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis. Narrowing down the possible therapeutic mechanisms is challenging because of the lack of good animal models of depression. Without an animal model, it is not possible to know which of the many observable molecular, cellular, and synaptic changes cause depression or underlie the therapeutic actions of effective antidepressants. Ketamine Shows Promise as a Rapidly Acting Drug to Treat Major Depressive Disorder

## Ketamine, which blocks the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor, is currently used in

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1515

Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


pediatric anesthesia for its ability to produce dissocia-

tive experiences as well as analgesia. It has been stud-

ied in randomized clinical trials with subjects suffering

from major depression. In the trials, ketamine was administered by intravenous infusion; it produced an antidepressant effect within 2 hours, a significant advantage over existing antidepressant drugs that typically take weeks to show benefit. The therapeutic effects of ketamine last for approximately 7 days, after which second and third doses may continue to be effective. If such results become widely replicated, ketamine would represent the first antidepressant drug that does not exert its primary action on monoamine neurotransmission. Studies to identify mechanisms by which ketamine relieves depression, like those for older antidepressants, are challenging in part because of the lack of good animal models of depression. At higher doses, ketamine is misused as a recreational drug to produce euphoria, dissociation, depersonalization, and hallucinations. Ketamine has also

been used in laboratory settings to induce cognitive symptoms reminiscent of schizophrenia in human subjects. Although the advantages of a rapidly acting antidepressant would be significant, for example in treating acutely suicidal individuals, the unwanted psychotropic effects of ketamine make its use problematic. Attempts to develop alternative NMDA receptor blockers in which the antidepressant effects might be separated from psychotropic side effects are under way. Psychotherapy Is Effective in the Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder and Anxiety Disorders

## Short-term symptom-focused psychotherapies have been developed for depression and anxiety and tested in clinical trials. The best-studied psychotherapies are

the cognitive behavioral therapies. Cognitive therapies that might be used to treat major depression focus on identifying and correcting excessively negative interpretations of events and of interactions with other people. For example, many depressed people exhibit a strong attentional bias toward negative information, automatically interpret neutral events as negative, and read evidence of disapproval into the behavior of others. Such automatic negative thinking, which can initiate or perpetuate depressed mood, can be much improved through cognitive psychotherapies. Therapies with a more behavioral component have proven useful in the treatment of anxiety disorders such as phobias or PTSD. In exposure therapy,

the affected individual is directed to vividly recollect phobic stimuli that trigger anxiety or avoidance. The therapist provides a safe context for such experiences

18/12/20 11:47 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A Serotonergic neurons


Inhibition of synthesis

(p-chlorophenylalanine)

Tryptophan Depressant Antidepressant No effect on mood

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1516

MAO inhibitors

selective serotonin

reuptake inhibitors

MAO inhibitors

Tricyclics and selective

NE reuptake inhibitors

Inactivation inhibitor

18/12/20 11:47 AM

Figure 61–7 (Opposite) Actions of antidepressant drugs at

serotonergic and noradrenergic synapses. The figure shows

the pre- and postsynaptic sides of serotonergic and noradren-

ergic synapses. Serotonin and norepinephrine are synthesized from amino acid precursors by enzymatic cascades. The neurotransmitters are packaged in synaptic vesicles; free neurotransmitter within the cytoplasm is metabolized by monoamine oxidase (MAO), an enzyme associated with the abundant mitochondria found in presynaptic terminals. Upon release, serotonin and norepinephrine interact with several types of pre- and postsynaptic receptors. Each neurotransmitter is cleared from the synapse by a specific transporter. The serotonin and norepinephrine transporters and MAO are targets of antidepressant drugs. A. Important sites of drug action at serotonergic synapses. Not all actions described are shown in the figure. 1. Enzymatic synthesis. Inhibition of synthesis of the rate- Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


found on the membranes of synaptic vesicles, causing reverse

transport of the monoamine neurotransmitter into the cyto-

plasm. The neurotransmitter is then reverse-transported out of

the neuron into the synapse via the uptake transporter. 6. Degradation. Phenelzine and tranylcypromine, both of which are effective for depression and panic disorder, block MAO-A and MAO-B. Moclobemide, effective against depression, is selective for MAO-A; selegiline, which has been used

- to treat Parkinson disease, is selective for MAO-B in low doses. (Abbreviation: 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.) B. Important sites of drug action at noradrenergic synapses. 1. Enzymatic synthesis. The competitive inhibitor α-methyltyrosine blocks the reaction catalyzed by tyrosine

hydroxylase that converts tyrosine to DOPA. A dithiocarbamate derivative, FLA-63 (not shown), blocks the reaction that con -

limiting enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase by p-chlorophenylalanine initiates the cascade that converts tryptophan to 5-OH-tryptophan, the precursor of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HT

- serotonin). 2. Storage. Reserpine and tetrabenazine interfere with the transport of serotonin and catecholamines into synaptic vesicles by blocking the vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT As a result, cytoplasmic serotonin is degraded (see step 6
- below), and thus, the neuron is depleted of neurotransmitter. Reserpine was used as an antihypertensive drug but commonly caused depression as a side effect. 3. Presynaptic receptors. Agonists at presynaptic receptors produce negative feedback on neurotransmitter synthesis or release. The agonist 8-hydroxy-diprolamino-tetraline (8-OHDPAT) acts on 5-HT receptors on the presynaptic neuron.
- , 2. 2 is degraded (see below), and thus the neuron is depleted of neurotransmitter. 3. Presynaptic receptors. Agonists at presynaptic receptors produce negative feedback on neurotransmitter synthesis or release. Clonidine is an agonist at α 2 -adrenergic receptors, inhibiting NE release. It has anxiolytic and sedative effects
- 1A The antimigraine triptan drugs (eg, sumatriptan) are agonists at 5-HT 1D receptors. 4. Postsynaptic receptors. The hallucinogen lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is a partial agonist at 5-HT 2A receptors on postsynaptic serotoninergic neurons. Second-generation antipsychotic drugs, such as risperidone and olanzapine, are
- and is also used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Yohimbine is an antagonist at α 2 -adrenergic receptors; it induces anxiety. 4. Postsynaptic receptors. Propranolol is an antagonist at β-adrenergic receptors that blocks many effects of the sympathetic nervous system. It is used to treat some forms of cardiovascular disease but is commonly used to block anxiety during
- antagonists at 5-HT 2A receptors in addition to their ability to block D 2 dopamine receptors. The antiemetic compound ondansetron is an antagonist at 5-HT 3 receptors, the only ligand-gated channel among the monoamine receptors. Its key site of action is in the medulla. 5. Uptake. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such as fluoxetine and sertraline, are selective blockers of the sero tonin transporter. The tricyclic drugs have mixed actions; some, such as clomipramine, are relatively selective for the serotonin
- performance situations. Phenoxybenzamine is an agonist at α-adrenergic receptors. 5. Uptake. Certain tricyclic antidepressants, such as desipramine, and newer NE selective reuptake inhibitors, such as reboxetine, selectively block the NE transporter, thus increasing synaptic NE. Amphetamines enter monoaminergic neu-
- -rons via the uptake transporter and interact with the vesicular transporter (the transporter on synaptic vesicles) to release neurotransmitter into the cytoplasm. The neurotransmitter is then pumped out of the neuron into the synapse via the uptake transporter acting in reverse. 6. Degradation. At the postsynaptic neuron, tropolone inhibits the enzyme catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), which inactivates NE (step 6a). Normetanephrine (NM) is formed by the action of COMT on NE. At the presynaptic neuron, degrada-
- tion by MAO is blocked by the MAO inhibitors phenelzine and tranylcypromine.

18/12/20 11:47 AM

- transporter. Uptake blockers increase synaptic concentrations of serotonin. Amphetamines enter monoaminergic neurons via the uptake transporter and bind to the vesicular transporter

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1517

- verts DOPA to dopamine. 2. Storage. Reserpine and tetrabenazine interfere with the transport of norepinephrine (NE), dopamine, and serotonin into synaptic vesicles by blocking the vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT . As a result, the cytoplasmic neurotransmitter


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

and also suggests new interpretations of such stimuli

that help the patient cope with the experience. Where

possible and when tolerable to patients, gradual transi-

tion to real-world exposures to phobic stimuli can be employed. Exposure therapy produces extinction learning in analogy with studies of animal behavior. The memory of the phobic stimulus is not erased, but the fearful

response is suppressed by new information that the stimulus and the context in which it is experienced are not dangerous. Animal physiology and lesioning studies and human imaging studies demonstrate that the prefrontal cortex is required for extinction learning and that the hippocampus is required for learning new contexts for familiar events or stimuli (eg, that a helicopter flying overhead does not portend an attack). Electroconvulsive Therapy Is Highly Effective Against Depression

## Although it still conjures up negative images in the popular imagination, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)

administered with modern anesthesia is medically

safe and a tolerable patient experience, and it remains a highly effective intervention for the acute treatment of serious major depressive disorder. It is most often used when depressive symptoms are severe and medications and psychotherapies have proven ineffective. It is also effective in both the depressed and manic phases of bipolar disorder. It is not effective for anxiety disorders in the absence of a mood disorder and is not used to treat them clinically. Generally, six to eight treatments are given, most commonly on an outpatient basis. Patients are anesthetized, and electrical stimulation is administered

just above the threshold to produce electroencephalographic evidence of a generalized seizure. The major side effect is a variable degree of anterograde and retrograde amnesia. Amnesia can be minimized, but not eliminated, by placing the electrodes unilaterally and using the lowest level of electrical stimulation needed. Rodents given ECT exhibit massive release of neurotransmitters, which causes significant activation of gene expression, presumably leading to largescale neural plasticity. However, the precise molecules, cells, and circuits involved in the therapeutic response remain unknown. Newer Forms of Neuromodulation Are Being Developed to Treat Depression

## Other forms of therapeutic electrical stimulation of the brain are being explored, motivated by the desire

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1518

to improve upon the therapeutic effects of ECT while

diminishing its side effects. These approaches are often

described as "neuromodulation."

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) employs a device on the scalp to deliver brief pulses of rapidly alternating magnetic stimulation. This induces cur-

rents to flow within axons in regions of cerebral cortex beneath the device. Daily administration of TMS over the left prefrontal cortex is safe and was effective enough to have received regulatory approval by the US Food and Drug Administration. Nonetheless, in subsequent trials, its efficacy appears to be only modest. Additional clinical experiments are under way aimed at improving efficacy. Alternative therapies under development include magnetic seizure therapy, an alternative to ECT in which a magnetic field is the used to produce a seizure.

The hope for this experimental therapy is to reproduce the efficacy of ECT with less anterograde and retrograde amnesia. Deep brain stimulation (DBS), mentioned above, is an invasive neuromodulatory treatment in wide use for treatment of the motor symptoms of Parkinson disease

and of essential tremor. For treatment of Parkinson dis -ease, an electrode is typically placed within the subthalamic nucleus, a component of basal ganglia circuitry involved in motor control that is well understood com -pared with circuits that regulate mood. A DBS electrode is connected by a wire that exits the skull and travels under the scalp and skin of the neck to a controller and battery pack that resides in the chest, much like a cardiac pacemaker battery. The rate at which the electrode stimulates its target can be controlled externally and is typically adjusted by the treatment team to optimize the therapeutic response. During the past decade, clinical trials of DBS have been extended from Parkinson disease and other movement disorders to psychiatric disorders. In addition to its use in treatment-refractory depression, DBS is being studied for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Several locations in the brain have been targets for DBS to treat depression. As described in Figure 61–4, the rostral anterior (subgenual) cingulate cortex

is activated by sadness. Accordingly, it has been used as a DBS target for treatment-resistant depression (Figure 61–8). In some clinical series, 60% of treatment-resistant patients achieved stable improvement with stimulation of the subgenual cingulate cortex. However, similar levels of efficacy using this target could not be replicated in a large multisite clinical trial. Differences in patient selection, interindividual differences in brain anatomy, or small differences in electrode placement may account for the disparate results seen to date. To

18/12/20 11:47 AM

Figure 61–8 Electrode placement for deep brain

stimulation (DBS) in the rostral anterior cingulate

cortex and measurement of response by [18F]

fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET). (Reproduced, with permission, from Helen Mayberg.) A. Left: The rostral anterior (subgenual) cingulate cortex, Brodmann area 25 (Cg25), is an anatomic target for DBS for patients with treatment-resistant depres-

sion. (Sagittal section; electrode site in red; corpus callosum is just superior and shown in white; dotted line, position of the electrode relative to the AC-genu line.) (Abbreviations: AC, anterior commissure; MidSCC, mid-subcallosal cingulate.) Right: A PET scan shows placement of the electrodes in the brain of a patient undergoing stimulation of the rostral anterior cingulate cortex. (Sagittal section.) B. PET scans show the changes in activity in patients with treatment-resistant depression who have improved with stimulation of the rostral anterior cin- Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety A Surgical procedure CC

AC

Anatomical target for electrode Bilateral DBS electrode placementAnatomical target for electrode

B Change in PET activity in DBS responders

<!-- image -->

gulate cortex. The top panels are sagittal sections; the bottom panels are coronal sections. Left: Pretreatment metabolic activity in patients with treatmentresistant depression. Red pseudo-color denotes elevated metabolic activity compared with healthy control subjects (note elevated activity in Cg25 before DBS); blue denotes lower metabolic activity. Right: Averages of patients who have improved at 3 or 6 months after initiation of DBS. Activity in Cg25 is decreased (blue) in patients who have had a positive response to stimulation. (Abbreviations: ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; BS, brain stem; F9, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; F46, prefrontal cortex; F47, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; HT, hypothalamus; Ins, insula; mF10, medial frontal cortex; MCC, middle cingulate cortex; OF11, orbital frontal cortex; SN, substantia nigra; vCD, ventral caudate.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

put it simply, depression is highly heterogeneous, and BS

MF10
F9F9 F9
ACC

Ins

Bipolar Disorder Can Be Treated With Lithium and

it should not be surprising that a single DBS target is

not useful for all treatment-resistant patients.

Lacking good animal models of mood disorders, human DBS treatment trials may provide a particularly important source of information about the brain

circuitry responsible for the symptoms of mental disorders. Although careful attention must be paid to obtaining informed consent and to safety, especially when the judgment of patients is influenced by severe depression, DBS may provide an opportunity to learn about mood regulation. In particular, newly developed electrodes not only stimulate a DBS target but can also record extracellular neuronal activity. Such "read– write" electrodes, currently being used in research settings only, may not only improve clinical results but also advance our knowledge of circuit dysfunction and therapeutic modulation in psychiatric disorders.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1519

Several Anticonvulsant Drugs

## In 1949, John Cade discovered the calming effects of lithium in guinea pigs and, soon thereafter, in a small clinical trial in bipolar patients. Cade's observations

initiated the modern era of psychopharmacology in which drugs, ultimately subjected to randomized, blinded clinical trials, were used to treat specific symptoms of mental disorders. Lithium eventually proved to be effective in treating acute episodes of mania and in stabilizing mood by reducing the frequency of cycling into mania and depression. Several drugs initially developed to treat epilepsy, such as valproic acid and lamotrigine, have also been shown to be effective in treating acute mania and for

mood stabilization and can serve as substitutes for lithium. In addition, antipsychotic drugs effectively

18/12/20 11:47 AM




Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

ameliorate symptoms of acute mania and, at low

doses, can also help stabilize mood. None of these

drugs exerts therapeutic effects rapidly; improvements

in mental state and behavior may take several weeks. The mechanisms by which lithium and anticonvulsant drugs exert beneficial effects on mania and on mood cycling are not known. Unlike the antidepressant

and antipsychotic drugs, however, there remain open questions about the initial molecular target of lithium in the nervous system relevant to the initiation of its therapeutic effects. This lack of certainty reflects the many actions of lithium at therapeutic concentrations in the brain. The most likely molecular target is inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase type 3β (GSK3β), a component of the Wnt signaling pathway that has many functions in the nervous system. As in the case of other drugs to treat psychiatric disorders, investigation of the therapeutic mechanism of lithium and of the mood-stabilizing properties of anticonvulsants is impeded by the lack of an animal model of bipolar disorder. Whatever the molecular mechanisms of lithium or the anticonvulsants, mood stabilizers appear to dampen the dynamics of mood regulatory systems.

Mood is regulated by the external environment as well as several internal inputs, including the internal hormonal milieu, immune modulators, and circadian controls (eg, both the serotonergic and noradrenergic systems show diurnal variations closely coupled with the sleep–wake cycle). The integration of these systems is complex, involving dynamic interactions that are still poorly understood. Second-Generation Antipsychotic Drugs Are Useful Treatments for Bipolar Disorder them an important treatment for the depressed phase of bipolar disorder as well as the treatment of acute mania.

They have gained an important role in therapeutics

because bipolar depression is less likely to respond to antidepressant drugs than unipolar depression. Highlights

1. Mood disorders are divided into unipolar and

bipolar disorder based on whether depression

occurs alone (unipolar) or whether a person also

- suffers from episodes of mania. Unipolar and bipolar disorders have different familial patterns of transmission. 2. Clinically significant unipolar depression, often denoted as major depressive disorder (major depression), differs from normal sadness by its
- persistence, pervasiveness, and association with physiological, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms. 3. Major depression is common (15%–20% lifetime prevalence) and disabling, making it a leading cause of disability worldwide. Bipolar disorder is
- less common (1% lifetime prevalence worldwide) but tends to produce severe symptoms that often require hospitalization. 4. Anxiety disorders are the most common psychiatric disorders. They range in severity from highly disabling cases of panic disorder and posttrau-
- matic stress disorder (PTSD) to simple phobias. They often co-occur with major depression. 5. Mood and anxiety disorders have both genetic and nongenetic components of risk. Bipolar disorder is more heritable than major depression or

## All antipsychotic drugs act by blocking D 2 receptors, but these drugs have long been recognized to have therapeutic effects not only in the treatment of

the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia, severe mood disorders, and many other conditions, but also in the treatment of acute manic episodes. The side effects of first-generation antipsychotic drugs are severe, most prominently Parkinson-like motor side effects that result from D 2 dopamine receptor antagonism. Most second-generation drugs have somewhat lower affinity for D 2 dopamine receptors than firstgeneration drugs and, in addition, have other receptor

- dopamine anxiety disorders. Childhood adversity and later environmental stressors play a significant role in susceptibility to major depression and anxiety disorders. Genetic analyses of bipolar disorder, major depression, and PTSD are beginning to yield molecular clues to pathogenesis. 6. The neural circuitry of fear and anxiety disorders involves the amygdala and its interconnections with the prefrontal cortex. The neural circuitry
- receptors, of major depression and bipolar disorder is less well understood. However, neuroimaging in humans with major depression implicated circuits involved in the processing of emotional salience and in cognitive control. 7. Bipolar disorder can be treated with lithium, certain anticonvulsant drugs such as valproic acid, and second-generation antipsychotic drugs,
- although many patients have residual symptoms, most commonly depression.

18/12/20 11:47 AM

effects, such as blocking serotonin 5-HT 2A resulting in a lower liability for severe motor side effects. These drugs are by no means free of serious side effects; most cause weight gain and associated metabolic conditions. However, their relative tolerability and their effects on serotonin receptors have made

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1520

8. Major depression and anxiety disorders can be

treated with diverse antidepressant drugs and by

cognitive and behavioral therapies. Electroconvul-

- sive therapy is effective for major depression that is unresponsive to medications. 9. Experimental treatments such as deep brain stimulation are being investigated for treatment of major depression and other psychiatric disorders.
- The development of electrodes that can record as well as stimulate promise greater insight in human neural circuit function in disease and its treatment.

Selected Reading

Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Holtzman D, Malenka RJ. 2015. Molec-

ular Neuropharmacology: Foundation for Clinical Neurosci-

## ence, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.

- Otte C, Gold SM, Penninx BW, et al. AF. 2016. Major depressive disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16065. Sullivan PF, Daly MJ, O'Donovan M. 2012. Genetic architec-
- ture of psychiatric disorders: the emerging picture and its implications. Nat Rev Genet 13:537–551.
- Yehuda R, Hoge CW, McFarlane AC, et al. 2015. Post-traumatic stress disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers 1:15057.
- References

Adhikari A, Lerner TN, Finkelstein J, et al. 2015. Basomedial

amygdala mediates top-down control of anxiety and fear.

Nature 527:179–185.

- American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
- Anacker C, Hen R. 2017. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive flexibility: linking memory and mood. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:335–346.
- Bagot RC, Cates HM, Purushothama I, et al. 2016. Circuitwide transcriptional profiling reveals brain region-specific gene networks regulating depression susceptibility.
- Neuron 90:969–983. Besnard A, Sahay A. 2016. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis, fear generalization, and stress. Neuropsychopharm 41:24–44.
- Cade JFJ. 1949. Lithium salts in the treatment of psychotic excitement. Med Australia 2:349–352.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1521

Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety


Clementz BA, Sweeney JA, Hamm, JP, et al. 2015. Identifica-

tion of distinct psychosis biotypes using brain-based bio-

markers. Am J Psychiatry 173:373–384.

- Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, Lee SH, Ripke S, et al. 2013. Genetic relationship between five psychiatric disorders estimated from genome-
- wide SNPs. Nat Genet 45:984–994. Davidson RJ, Pizzagalli D, Nitschke JB, Putnam K. 2002. Depression: perspectives from affective neuroscience. Annu Rev Psychol 53:545–574.
- Dayan P, Huys QJ. 2009. Serotonin in affective control. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:95–126. Drysdale AT, Grosenick L, Downar J, et al. 2017. Resting-state
- connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of depression. Nat Med 23:28–38.
- Etkin A, Klemenhagen KC, Dudman JT, et al. 2004. Individual differences in trait anxiety predict the response of the basolateral amygdala to unconsciously processed fearful
- Steven E. Hyman Carol Tamminga faces. Neuron 44:1043–1055. Fettes P, Schulze L, Downar J. 2017. Cortico-striato-thalamic loop circuits of the orbitofrontal cortex: promising therapeutic targets in psychiatric illness. Front Syst Neurocsci
- 11:25. Fornaro M, Stubbs B, De BD, et al. 2016. Atypical antipsychotics in the treatment of acute bipolar depression with mixed features: a systematic review and exploratory meta-analy-
- sis of placebo-controlled clinical trials. Int J Mol Sci 17:241. Heimer L. 1995. The Human Brain and Spinal Cord, 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. Holtzheimer PE, Mayberg HS. 2011. Deep brain stimulation
- for psychiatric disorders. Annu Rev Neurosci 34:289–307. Hui PS, Sim K, Baldessarini RJ. 2015. Pharmacological
- approaches for treatment-resistant bipolar disorder. Curr Neuropharmacol 13:592–604.
- Hyde CL, Nagle MW, Tian C, et al. 2016. Identification of 15 genetic loci associated with risk of major depression in individuals of European descent. Nat Genet 48:1031–1036.
- Ivleva EI, Morris DW, Moates AF, et al. 2010. Genetics and intermediate phenotypes of the schizophrenia: bipolar disorder boundary. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34:897–921.
- Johansen JP, Cain CK, Ostroff LE, LeDoux JE. 2011. Molecular mechanisms of fear learning and memory. Cell 47:509–524. Kendler KS, Prescott CA, Myers J, Neale MC. 2003. The struc-
- ture of genetic and environmental risk factors for common psychiatric and substance use disorders in men and
- women. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60:929–937. Kessler RC, Bromet EJ. 2013. The epidemiology of depression across cultures. Annu Rev Public Health 34:119–138. Kreuger RF, Markon KE. 2006. Reinterpreting comorbidity: a
- model-based approach to understanding and classifying psychopathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2:111–133.
- Mayberg HS, Brannan SK, Mahurin RK, et al. 1997. Cingulate function in depression: a potential predictor of treatment response. NeuroReport 8:1057–1061.
- Mayberg HS, Liotti M, Brannan SK, et al. 1999. Reciprocal limbic-cortical function and negative mood: converging PET findings in depression and normal sadness. Am J
- Psychiatry 156:675–682.

18/12/20 11:47 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, et al. 2005. Deep brain

stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron

45:651–660.

- McClintock SM, Reti IM, Carpenter LL, et al. 2018. Consensus recommendations for the clinical application of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in the treat-
- ment of depression. J Clin Psychiatry 79:1. doi:10.4088/ JCP.16cs10905. Miller BR, Hen R. 2015. The current state of the neurogenic theory of depression and anxiety. Curr Opin Neurobiol 30:51–58.
- Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, et al. 2007. Depression, chronic diseases, and decrements in health: results from the World Health Surveys. Lancet 370:851–858.
- Muller VI, Cieslik EC, Serbanescu I, et al. 2017. Altered brain activity in unipolar depression revisited. Meta-analyses of neuroimaging studies. JAMA Psychiatry 74:47–55.
- Neal, BM, Sklar P. 2015. Genetic analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder reveals polygenicity but also suggests new directions for molecular interrogation. Curr
- Opin Neurobiol 30:131–138. Nock MK, Borges G, Bromet EJ, et al. 2008. Cross-national prevalence and risk factors for suicidal ideation, plans and attempts. Br J Psychiatry 192:98–105.
- Pizzagalli D, Pascual-Marqui RD, Nitschke JB, et al. 2001. Anterior cingulate activity as a predictor of degree of treatment response in major depression: evidence from
- brain electrical tomography analysis. Am J Psychiatry 158:405–415.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1522

Ripke S, Wray NR, Lewis CM, et al. 2013. A mega-analysis

of genome-wide association studies for major depressive

disorder. Mol Psychiatry 18:497–511.

- Seeley WW, Menon V, Schaztzberg AF, et al. 2007. Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. J Neurosci 27:2349–2356.
- Sheline YI, Sanghavi M, Mintun MA, Gado MH. 1999. Depression duration but not age predicts hippocampal volume loss in medically healthy women with recurrent
- major depression. J Neurosci 19:5034–5043. Stoddard J, Gotts SJ, Brotman MA, et al. 2016. Aberrant intrinsic functional connectivity within and between corticostriatal and temporal-parietal networks in adults and
- youth with bipolar disorder. Psychol Med 46:1509–1522. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, et al. 2006. Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using measurement-based care in STAR * D: implications for clinical
- practice. Am J Psychiatry 163:28–40. Tye KM, Prakash R, Kim SY, et al. 2011. Amygdala circuitry mediating reversible and bidirectional control of anxiety. Nature 471:358–362.
- Whiteford HA, Degenhardt L, Rehm J, et al. 2013. Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the global burden of disease
- study 2010. Lancet 382:1575–1586. Zarate CA Jr, Singh JB, Carlson PJ, et al. 2006. A randomized trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in treatment-resistant major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry
- 63:856–864.

18/12/20 11:47 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, et al. 2005. Deep brain

stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron

45:651–660.

- McClintock SM, Reti IM, Carpenter LL, et al. 2018. Consensus recommendations for the clinical application of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in the treat-
- ment of depression. J Clin Psychiatry 79:1. doi:10.4088/ JCP.16cs10905. Miller BR, Hen R. 2015. The current state of the neurogenic theory of depression and anxiety. Curr Opin Neurobiol 30:51–58.
- Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, et al. 2007. Depression, chronic diseases, and decrements in health: results from the World Health Surveys. Lancet 370:851–858.
- Muller VI, Cieslik EC, Serbanescu I, et al. 2017. Altered brain activity in unipolar depression revisited. Meta-analyses of neuroimaging studies. JAMA Psychiatry 74:47–55.
- Neal, BM, Sklar P. 2015. Genetic analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder reveals polygenicity but also suggests new directions for molecular interrogation. Curr
- Opin Neurobiol 30:131–138. Nock MK, Borges G, Bromet EJ, et al. 2008. Cross-national prevalence and risk factors for suicidal ideation, plans and attempts. Br J Psychiatry 192:98–105.
- Pizzagalli D, Pascual-Marqui RD, Nitschke JB, et al. 2001. Anterior cingulate activity as a predictor of degree of treatment response in major depression: evidence from
- brain electrical tomography analysis. Am J Psychiatry 158:405–415.

Kandel-Ch61\_1501-1522.indd 1522

Ripke S, Wray NR, Lewis CM, et al. 2013. A mega-analysis

of genome-wide association studies for major depressive

disorder. Mol Psychiatry 18:497–511.

- Seeley WW, Menon V, Schaztzberg AF, et al. 2007. Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. J Neurosci 27:2349–2356.
- Sheline YI, Sanghavi M, Mintun MA, Gado MH. 1999. Depression duration but not age predicts hippocampal volume loss in medically healthy women with recurrent
- major depression. J Neurosci 19:5034–5043. Stoddard J, Gotts SJ, Brotman MA, et al. 2016. Aberrant intrinsic functional connectivity within and between corticostriatal and temporal-parietal networks in adults and
- youth with bipolar disorder. Psychol Med 46:1509–1522. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, et al. 2006. Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using measurement-based care in STAR * D: implications for clinical
- practice. Am J Psychiatry 163:28–40. Tye KM, Prakash R, Kim SY, et al. 2011. Amygdala circuitry mediating reversible and bidirectional control of anxiety. Nature 471:358–362.
- Whiteford HA, Degenhardt L, Rehm J, et al. 2013. Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the global burden of disease
- study 2010. Lancet 382:1575–1586. Zarate CA Jr, Singh JB, Carlson PJ, et al. 2006. A randomized trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in treatment-resistant major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry
- 63:856–864.

18/12/20 11:47 AM


Disorders Affecting Social Cognition:

## Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Share Characteristic

Behavioral Features

Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Also Share

## Distinctive Cognitive Abnormalities Social Communication Is Impaired in Autism Spectrum

## Disorder: The Mind Blindness Hypothesis Other Social Mechanisms Contribute to Autism

Spectrum Disorder People With Autism Show a Lack of Behavioral Flexibility

Some Individuals With Autism Have Special Talents

Genetic Factors Increase Risk for Autism Spectrum Disorder

Rare Genetic Syndromes Have Provided Initial Insights Into

## the Biology of Autism Spectrum Disorders Fragile X Syndrome

## Rett Syndrome

Williams Syndrome

Angelman Syndrome and Prader-Willi Syndrome

Neurodevelopmental Syndromes Provide Insight Into

the Mechanisms of Social Cognition

The Complex Genetics of Common Forms of Autism

Spectrum Disorder Are Being Clarified Genetics and Neuropathology Are Illuminating the Neural

## Mechanisms of Autism Spectrum Disorder Genetic Findings Can Be Interpreted Using Systems

## Biological Approaches Autism Spectrum Disorder Genes Have Been Studied in

a Variety of Model Systems Postmortem and Brain Tissue Studies Provide Insight

Into Autism Spectrum Disorder Pathology

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1523

Advances in Basic and Translational Science Provide a Path to

Elucidate the Pathophysiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder

Highlights


ental retardation, now referred to widely

as intellectual disability, is currently defined

as having an IQ below 70 accompanied by

marked deficits in adaptive functioning. Both terms have been broadly used to label a variety of cognitive impairments linked to prenatal or early postnatal brain abnormalities. For decades, subsets of individuals with rare intellectual disability syndromes, such as Rett syndrome or fragile X syndrome, have been characterized by their genetic etiologies. We are now beginning to elucidate the complex genetics of more prevalent neurodevelopmental disorders without distinct physical features that distinguish them, including so-called idiopathic or nonsyndromic forms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The combination of insights resulting from the intensive study of rare genetic syndromes coupled with successes in unraveling the genetics underlying idiopathic ASD has transformed our understanding of normal and pathological development of the human brain. Common to all of these disorders are mental impairments that persist throughout life, hampering development and learning. Generally speaking, even

if all mental functions seem to be affected, conditions with distinct etiologies and natural histories can be differentiated because some cognitive domains tend to be

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

more impaired than others. And indeed, these differ-

ences are reified in diagnostic schemes that draw dis-

tinctions between developmental abnormalities that

affect primarily general cognition, social cognition, or perception. These differential cognitive and behavioral vulnerabilities may provide useful clues about the origin and developmental time course of specific mental functions in normal development. In this chapter, we focus principally on neurodevelopmental disorders that include abnormalities in social functioning, including ASD, fragile X syndrome,

Williams syndrome, Rett syndrome, and Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes. These conditions all impair highly sophisticated brain functions including social awareness and communication. ASD is a prime focus for several reasons: the high prevalence in the population; the overlap in genetic risks with other common neuropsychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia; and the absence of a defining neuropathology. They are also exemplars of the etiological and phenotypic heterogeneity common to many psychiatric syndromes. In this respect, ASD is a paradigmatic neuropsychiatric syndrome. Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Share

Characteristic Behavioral Features

## Profound social disability has probably always been with us, but the characterization of autism as a medi-

cal syndrome was first described in the literature in

1943 by Leo Kanner and in 1944 by Hans Asperger. Today, clinicians and researchers think of autism as a spectrum of disorders with two defining but highly variable diagnostic features: impaired social communication and stereotyped behaviors with highly restricted interests. Until recently, the term "Asperger syndrome" was used to describe individuals who met these two diagnostic criteria, but in whom language acquisition was

not delayed and IQ was in the normal range. In the most recent edition of the standard psychiatric diagnostic manual, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), Asperger syndrome along with a distinct disorder known as pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified— designed to capture individuals with deficits in social communication who did not meet full criteria in other areas—were eliminated in favor of including variations within a single spectrum construct. Autism spectrum disorder is present in at least 1.5% of the population. Rigorous epidemiological studies estimate prevalence as high as 2.6% for the full

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1524

spectrum of social disability, far higher than estimated

only decades ago. The reasons for the increase in the

prevalence over a relatively short time frame are of

considerable interest and active debate, particularly among the lay public. Within the scientific community, a consensus has emerged that this increase reflects a combination of changing diagnostic criteria, increased awareness among families and health care professionals, "diagnostic substitution" (in which individuals who formerly would have been diagnosed with intellectual disability are now more likely to be identified as socially disabled), and some true increase in incidence. These issues will be discussed below with regard to genetic risks. Autism spectrum disorders occur predominantly in males, although the typically cited 4:1 male-to-female ratio has recently been called into

question based on concerns about male bias in the approaches used to ascertain the diagnosis, including the diagnostic instruments. Even accounting for these challenges, however, the cumulative evidence suggests a ratio bias of at least 2:1 to 3:1 male excess. Individuals across the IQ spectrum are affected, and based on current diagnostic practices, about half of all individuals with ASD also have intellectual dis -ability. By definition, ASD must be detectable before 3 years of age, but recent studies have shown that it is possible to identify affected children in high-risk families well within the first year of life. ASD occurs in all countries and cultures and in every socioeconomic group. Although ASD clearly affects the brain, no definitive biological markers have yet been identified; thus, diagnosis is based on behavioral criteria. This does not

mean that there are not strong biological correlates, including specific gene mutations and neuroimaging findings, but none of these are sufficiently specific or predictive to be useful as an alternative to the gold standard of clinical assessment. Moreover, because behavior is variable during development and depends on a number of factors—age, environment, social context, and availability and duration of remedial help— no single behavior is likely ever to be conclusively diagnostic. Like other neurodevelopmental syndromes, ASD typically endures throughout life. However, in recent longitudinal studies, approximately 10% of clearly

affected children showed improvement, with little or no evidence of social disability later in life. Autism is not progressive. On the contrary, special educational programs and professional support often lead to improvements in behavior and adaptive functioning with age.

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Also

Share Distinctive Cognitive Abnormalities

## Social Communication Is Impaired in Autism Spectrum Disorder: The Mind Blindness Hypothesis

## One cognitive theory of social communication postulates that humans have a particularly well-developed ability to understand the mental states of others in

an intuitive and fully automatic fashion. Watching a young person surreptitiously trying to open a car door without a key, you instantly understand that she believes she can break in while being unobserved,

PPC

Cerebellum SMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 62–1 Brain areas implicated in the three core defi-

cits characteristic of autism: impaired social interaction,

impaired language and communication, and severely

restricted interests with repetitive and stereotyped behaviors. Areas implicated in social deficits include the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and the amygdala (A). Cortex bordering the superior temporal sulcus (STS) has been implicated in mediating the perception that a

<!-- image -->

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1525

Cerebellum

living thing is moving and gaze perception. Face processing

involves a region of the inferior temporal cortex within the fusi-

form gyrus (FG). Comprehension and expression of language

involve a number of regions including the inferior frontal region, the striatum, and subcortical areas such as the pontine nuclei (PN). The striatum has also been implicated in the mediation of repetitive behaviors. (Abbreviations: IFG, inferior frontal gyrus; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.)

18/12/20 11:51 AM


and you expect her to run away as soon as she realizes

someone is watching. Thus, you explain and predict her

behavior by inferring her mental states (desires, inten-

tions, beliefs, knowledge) from her overt behavior. This so-called mentalizing ability, termed a theory of mind , is thought to depend on specific brain mechanisms and circuits underlying social cognition (Figure 62–1). Further, it is postulated that mentalizing is impaired in ASD, with profound effects on social development. It is now generally agreed that insight into the mental state of others depends on the capacity to mentalize spontaneously. Spontaneous mentalizing allows

us to appreciate that different people have different


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

thoughts and that thoughts are internal and different

from external reality.

The inability to mentalize, or "mind blindness,"

was first tested in children with autism using a simple puppet game, the Sally-Anne test. Young children with

ASD, unlike those with Down syndrome or typically developing 4-year-olds, cannot predict where a puppet will first look for an object that was moved while the puppet was out of the room. They are not able to imagine that the puppet will "think" that the object will be where the puppet had left it (Figure 62–2). Many children with ASD eventually do learn to pass this task, but on average with a 5-year delay. Mentalizing acquired so slowly remains effortful and error-prone even in adulthood.

At the same time, young children with ASD show excellent appreciation of physical causes and events. For instance, a child who is incapable of falsely telling

another that a box is locked is quite capable of locking the same box to prevent its contents from being stolen. Variations of the Sally-Anne test and other mentalizing tasks have been used with children and adults with ASD since the mid-1980s (Figure 62–3).

Figure 62–2 The Sally-Anne test. This first test

of the "theory of mind" begins with a scripted

performance using two dolls. Sally has a basket;

Anne has a box. Sally puts a ball into her basket. She goes for a walk and leaves the room. While Sally is outside, naughty Anne takes the ball out of the basket and puts it into her box. Now Sally comes back from her walk and wants to play with her ball. Where will she look for the ball, the bas -ket or the box? The answer, the basket, is obvious to most typically developing 4-year-olds but not to autistic children of the same or even higher mental age. (Adapted from original artwork by Axel Scheffler.)

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1526

<!-- image -->

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Figure 62–3 Examples of cartoons

used in imaging studies of "mentaliz-

ing." Participants were asked to consider

the meaning of each picture (silently) and then to explain them. In a functional magnetic resonance imaging study, normal adults passively viewed cartoons that require mentalizing versus those that do not. A characteristic network of brain regions is activated in each subject (see Figure 62–4). (Adapted from Gallagher et al. 2000.)

Functional neuroimaging has been used to exam- the Sally-Anne test. The third region is the amygdala,

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

A Mentalizing required B Mentalizing not required

<!-- image -->

ine activity in the brain of healthy subjects while they

are engaged in tasks that necessitate thinking about

mental states. A wide range of tasks using visual and verbal stimuli has been used in these studies. In an early positron emission tomography study, adults in a control cohort viewed silent animations of geometric shapes. In some of the animations, the triangles move in scripted scenarios designed to evoke mentalizing (eg, triangles tricking each other). In other animations, the triangles move randomly in a manner that does not evoke mentalizing. Comparison of the scans made while subjects viewed each type of animation reveals a specific network of four brain centers involved in mentalizing (Figure 62–4). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies using the same animations have shown that activity in this network is reduced in subjects with ASD. This network has four components. The first, in the medial prefrontal cortex, is a region thought to be involved in monitoring one's own thoughts. A sec-

ond component, in the temporoparietal region of the superior temporal lobe, is known to be activated by eye gaze and biological motion. Patients with lesions in this area in the left hemisphere are unable to pass

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1527

which is involved in the evaluation of social and non

-

social information for indications of danger in the

environment. The fourth region is an inferior temporal region involved in the perception of faces. Recent studies have used stimuli intended to capture more nuanced and naturalistic social content, for example, using movies of actual social encounters as

opposed to static pictures of facial expressions. These studies have identified, among other things, the role of the orbital frontal cortex in social cognition. Other Social Mechanisms Contribute to Autism Spectrum Disorder

## From birth, normal infants prefer to attend to people rather than other stimuli. An absence of this preference could lead to an inability to understand and

interact with others. Indeed, the absence of preferential attention to social stimuli and mutual atten -tion are widely acknowledged as early signs of ASD. These deficits may not involve problems with mentalizing, given that mutual attention normally appears toward the end of the first year when signs of mentalizing are still sparse.

18/12/20 11:51 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Frame from animation that elicits mentalizing Extrastriate

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

volunteers were presented with animated triangles that moved

in such a way that viewers would attribute mental states to

them. In the sample frame shown, the larger triangle was seen as encouraging the smaller triangle to leave the enclosure. They were also presented with animated triangles that moved in a Researchers have long considered the possibility that a specific neural mechanism underlies attention

<!-- image -->

to social stimuli, such as faces, voices, and biological

motion. In favor of this hypothesis, researchers found that the gaze of individuals with ASD is abnormal when watching social scenes. For example, multiple studies have found that individuals with ASD fixate on people's mouths instead of showing the normal preference for eyes (Figure 62–5). People With Autism Show a Lack of Behavioral Flexibility

## Repetitive and inflexible behavior in ASD may reflect abnormalities in frontal lobe executive functions, a

wide array of higher cognitive processes that include

the ability to disengage from a given task, inhibit

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1528

STS-temporal-

parietal junction

more or less random fashion and thus would not elicit mental

izing. The highlighted areas show differences in the positron

emission tomography scans of brain activation when these

two viewing conditions were compared. (Abbreviation: STS , superior temporal sulcus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Castelli et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002, Oxford University Press.) inappropriate responses, stay on task (plan and manage sequences of deliberate actions), keep multiple task

demands in working memory, monitor performance,

and shift attention from one task to another. Even ASD individuals with IQs in the normal range have problems in planning, organizing, and flexibly switching between behaviors. Irrespective of

IQ, affected individuals have difficulties suggesting various different uses of a single object such as a handkerchief (used to block a sneeze, to wrap loose objects, etc.). Flexible thinking is also poor in patients with acquired damage to the frontal lobe. Some Individuals With Autism Have Special Talents

A particularly fascinating feature of ASD in some indi-

## viduals is "savant syndrome," defined by the presence

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Medial prefrontal cortex

-

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

Figure 62–5 Individuals with autistic disorder

often do not look into the eyes of others. Pat-

terns of eye movements in individuals with autism

were studied while the subjects watched clips from the film Who's Afraid of Virginia Wolf? When looking at human faces, the subjects tended to look at the mouth rather than the eyes, and in scenes of intense interaction between people, they tended to look at irrelevant places rather than at the faces of the actors. (Reproduced, with permission, from Klin et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 American Psychiatric Association.)


Typically developing viewer

<!-- image -->

of one or more exceptional skills that are in marked con-

trast to the individual's overall disability but also rare in

the population at large. The most widely cited estimate

is that 10% of individuals with ASD demonstrate such exceptional abilities compared to about 1 in 1,000 individuals with other forms of intellectual disability. In the largest ASD cohort surveyed by selfreporting to date (about 5,000 families), 531 individuals were reported to have exceptional abilities in the

following 10 areas (listed in descending frequency): music, memory, art, hyperlexia, mathematics, mechanical, coordination, directions, calendar calculating, and extrasensory perception. Subsequent small-scale studies have placed the prevalence of savant skills in ASD at between 13% and 28%. A recently established savant syndrome registry now includes more than 400 people from 33 countries. Among a group of 319 individuals who met some cri-

teria that earned them a savant diagnosis based on family or caregiver reports or self-reporting, 75% who showed savant skills in childhood were diagnosed with ASD. Approximately half reported a single exceptional skill and half reported multiple skills. Music was the most commonly reported exceptional skill, followed by art, memory, and mathematics. Calendar calculating, while present in many savants along with another skill, was the sole skill in only about 5% of the sample. Among this self- or familyselected group, the overall sex distribution mirrored that reported for ASD in general, with a male-tofemale ratio of approximately 4:1.

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1529

One explanation for savant syndrome is that

information processing is preferentially geared to tiny

details at the cost of seeing the bigger picture. (For

example, the drawing by the gifted artist with highfunctioning autism in Figure 62–6 shows remarkably detailed cityscapes, as well as detailed numerical patterns and dates.) A similar hypothesis is that brain regions involved in perception are overfunctioning; another possibility is that there is a preference for manipulating the bits of information that fit within a strict framework such as calendar knowledge or a bus timetable. Neuropsychological data support both explanations, but decisive experiments to distinguish between them remain to be done. Genetic Factors Increase Risk for Autism

Spectrum Disorder

## The earliest evidence that genes contribute to ASD arose from studies of twin pairs as well as familial

aggregation. The former show from 60% to 90% con-

cordance among monozygotic twin pairs; this wide range is due in part to previously used diagnostic criteria and classifications. For example, the highest estimates of monozygotic concordance are derived from observations of twins with any of three diagnoses that made up the social disability spectrum prior to the reformulations in the DSM-5. Only approximately 60% of monozygotic twins were found to be concordant for the "full diagnosis" of autism, which was defined at

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

<!-- image -->

outsider artist. In the attention to detail, this drawing resembles

the drawings of other autistic savant artists. The intricate topographical detail of a symmetrically arranged city, with rivers,

bridges, and tall buildings, is combined with minutely executed the time as comprising fundamental impairments in

each of three categories: social communication, lan-

guage development, and restricted interests or repeti-

tive behaviors. In contrast, dizygotic twins show 10% to 30% concordance—again with the lower number estimating concordance for the diagnosis of isolated autism, while the larger number encompasses any of three diagnoses on the autism spectrum. This difference between the rates at which monozygotic and dizygotic twins share an ASD phenotype is attributed to differences in the amount

of shared genetic material between the two types of twin pairs. Monozygotic siblings share all their DNA, whereas dizygotic twins share as much DNA as any sibling pair. In addition to these types of data, it has long been observed that ASD runs in families: Current estimates are that if parents have one child with ASD, the risk that a second child will be affected increases approximately 5- to 10-fold over the population base rate.

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1530

given date has often been described for autistic savants. The

viewer of this drawing can partake in an otherwise very private world of space and time, numbers, and patterns. (Reproduced, with permission, from the Henry Boxer Gallery, London.) The most generous estimates of genetic contribu-

tion do not explain all risk for ASD in the population.

Some contribution from the environment is a certainty.

However, given the well-known public debate on the issue of whether immunization is a factor in ASD, it is important to note that there is no credible evidence that the increase in ASD prevalence is due to immunizations. The initial study that raised the issue of the contribution of the trivalent measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine has been retracted and thoroughly repudiated by the editors of the journal in which the article appeared, as well as by 10 of 12 of the original authors. A wide range of subsequent investigations, both of the MMR vaccine and of vaccines with the mercury-containing preservative thimerosal, has found no evidence for association with ASD risk. The counter argument that certain rare individuals may be predisposed to a vulnerability to vaccines leading to ASD is nonfalsifiable. However, three lines of

evidence suggest that such a contribution, if present, is

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

likely to be quite small. First, it is important to recall

that the basis for the MMR hypothesis has been thor-

oughly debunked, and consequently, the prior prob-

ability that vaccines are major etiological factors is extremely low. Second, even in very large research cohorts, it has so far not been possible to detect a risk signal. Third, although there is a subset of children with ASD who show developmental regression in the second year of life, there is often evidence on careful examination of preexisting delay. In the final analysis, although the current level of understanding of pathophysiological mechanisms makes it impossible to definitively exclude any etiological contributor in a single individual, what is incontrovertible is that the risks to children of not receiving vaccinations are clear, measurable, and far greater overall than the role vaccines might play in ASD risk. Although the evidence for a predominantly genetic contribution has been consistent, until recently, the search for risk genes contributing to nonsyndromic

forms of ASD proved to be extremely challenging. Now, as will be discussed below, technological advances and changes in research culture have transformed the field. Moreover, critically important initial insights into both the genetics and neurobiology of ASD have emerged from the investigation of well-characterized genetic neurodevelopmental disorders, sometimes referred to as Mendelian syndromes (those with a single causative gene or genomic locus to the condition). These disorders typically manifest with intellectual disability, often with evidence of social impairment. Several of these syndromes, including fragile X, Rett, Williams, and Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes, have been particularly important in beginning to elaborate the biology of ASD. Rare Genetic Syndromes Have Provided

Initial Insights Into the Biology of Autism

Spectrum Disorders

## Fragile X Syndrome Fragile X syndrome is a common form of chromo-

some X–linked intellectual disability. Patients display

a range of behavioral abnormalities including poor

eye contact, social anxiety, and repetitive behaviors. In addition, approximately 30% of boys with fragile X meet the all diagnostic criteria for ASD. Moreover, in research with multiple cohorts, up to 1% of participants with apparently idiopathic ASD also carried fragile X mutations. The overall prevalence is approximately 1 in 4,000 boys and 1 in 8,000 girls.

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1531


The fragile X mutation is quite remarkable. The

FMR1 gene on the X chromosome includes the nucleo-

tide triplet CGG. In normal individuals, this triplet is

repeated in approximately 30 copies. In fragile X syndrome patients, the number of repeats is more than 200, with approximately 800 repeats being most common. This expansion of trinucleotide repeats has since been observed in other genes leading to neurological diseases, such as Huntington disease (Chapters 2 and 63). When the number of CGG repeats exceeds 200, the FMR1 gene regulatory region becomes heavily methylated, and gene expression is shut off. Consequently, in these children, the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) is lacking. Lack of functional FMRP is considered responsible for fragile X syndrome. FMRP is a selective RNAbinding protein that blocks translation of messenger

RNA until protein synthesis is required. It is found with ribosomes at the base of dendritic spines, where it regulates local dendritic protein synthesis that is needed for synaptogenesis and certain forms of longlasting synaptic changes associated with learning and memory (Chapters 52 and 53). Interestingly, long-term depression of excitatory synaptic transmission, a form of long-lasting synaptic change that requires local protein synthesis, is enhanced in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome in which the gene encoding FMRP has been deleted. Loss of FMRP may enhance long-term depression by allowing excess translation of the messenger RNAs important for synaptic plasticity. An exciting implication of these data is that antagonists of the type 5 metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR5), the activation of which is required for

the enhanced protein synthesis underlying long-term depression, may lessen the excess protein translation. In fact, compounds with this activity have been found to rescue the mutant phenotype in mouse and fruit fly models. Thus far, clinical trials of mGluR5 antagonists for individuals with fragile X with ASD have not shown efficacy against the defined clinical end points. However, it is still too early to tell whether these initial forays into rational drug design for neurodevelopmental disorders may or may not be promising in the long run. A range of challenges have confronted these pioneering efforts, including measuring change in individuals with ASD, identifying ideal clinical end points, and determining the best age for evaluating interventions. Rett Syndrome

Another single-gene disorder showing overlap with

ASD is Rett syndrome, a devastating disorder that

primarily affects girls. Affected females have normal

18/12/20 11:51 AM
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

likely to be quite small. First, it is important to recall

that the basis for the MMR hypothesis has been thor-

oughly debunked, and consequently, the prior prob-

ability that vaccines are major etiological factors is extremely low. Second, even in very large research cohorts, it has so far not been possible to detect a risk signal. Third, although there is a subset of children with ASD who show developmental regression in the second year of life, there is often evidence on careful examination of preexisting delay. In the final analysis, although the current level of understanding of pathophysiological mechanisms makes it impossible to definitively exclude any etiological contributor in a single individual, what is incontrovertible is that the risks to children of not receiving vaccinations are clear, measurable, and far greater overall than the role vaccines might play in ASD risk. Although the evidence for a predominantly genetic contribution has been consistent, until recently, the search for risk genes contributing to nonsyndromic

forms of ASD proved to be extremely challenging. Now, as will be discussed below, technological advances and changes in research culture have transformed the field. Moreover, critically important initial insights into both the genetics and neurobiology of ASD have emerged from the investigation of well-characterized genetic neurodevelopmental disorders, sometimes referred to as Mendelian syndromes (those with a single causative gene or genomic locus to the condition). These disorders typically manifest with intellectual disability, often with evidence of social impairment. Several of these syndromes, including fragile X, Rett, Williams, and Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes, have been particularly important in beginning to elaborate the biology of ASD. Rare Genetic Syndromes Have Provided

Initial Insights Into the Biology of Autism

Spectrum Disorders

## Fragile X Syndrome Fragile X syndrome is a common form of chromo-

some X–linked intellectual disability. Patients display

a range of behavioral abnormalities including poor

eye contact, social anxiety, and repetitive behaviors. In addition, approximately 30% of boys with fragile X meet the all diagnostic criteria for ASD. Moreover, in research with multiple cohorts, up to 1% of participants with apparently idiopathic ASD also carried fragile X mutations. The overall prevalence is approximately 1 in 4,000 boys and 1 in 8,000 girls.

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1531


The fragile X mutation is quite remarkable. The

FMR1 gene on the X chromosome includes the nucleo-

tide triplet CGG. In normal individuals, this triplet is

repeated in approximately 30 copies. In fragile X syndrome patients, the number of repeats is more than 200, with approximately 800 repeats being most common. This expansion of trinucleotide repeats has since been observed in other genes leading to neurological diseases, such as Huntington disease (Chapters 2 and 63). When the number of CGG repeats exceeds 200, the FMR1 gene regulatory region becomes heavily methylated, and gene expression is shut off. Consequently, in these children, the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) is lacking. Lack of functional FMRP is considered responsible for fragile X syndrome. FMRP is a selective RNAbinding protein that blocks translation of messenger

RNA until protein synthesis is required. It is found with ribosomes at the base of dendritic spines, where it regulates local dendritic protein synthesis that is needed for synaptogenesis and certain forms of longlasting synaptic changes associated with learning and memory (Chapters 52 and 53). Interestingly, long-term depression of excitatory synaptic transmission, a form of long-lasting synaptic change that requires local protein synthesis, is enhanced in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome in which the gene encoding FMRP has been deleted. Loss of FMRP may enhance long-term depression by allowing excess translation of the messenger RNAs important for synaptic plasticity. An exciting implication of these data is that antagonists of the type 5 metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR5), the activation of which is required for

the enhanced protein synthesis underlying long-term depression, may lessen the excess protein translation. In fact, compounds with this activity have been found to rescue the mutant phenotype in mouse and fruit fly models. Thus far, clinical trials of mGluR5 antagonists for individuals with fragile X with ASD have not shown efficacy against the defined clinical end points. However, it is still too early to tell whether these initial forays into rational drug design for neurodevelopmental disorders may or may not be promising in the long run. A range of challenges have confronted these pioneering efforts, including measuring change in individuals with ASD, identifying ideal clinical end points, and determining the best age for evaluating interventions. Rett Syndrome

Another single-gene disorder showing overlap with

ASD is Rett syndrome, a devastating disorder that

primarily affects girls. Affected females have normal

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

development from birth until 6 to 18 months of age,

when they regress, losing speech and hand skills that

they had acquired. Rett syndrome is progressive, and

initial symptoms are followed by repetitive hand movements, loss of motor control, and intellectual disability. Often young girls will display symptoms indistinguishable from ASD early in the course of the syndrome, although social communication frequently improves later in childhood. Its prevalence is approximately 1 in 10,000 live female births. Rett syndrome is an X-linked inherited disease caused by loss-of-function mutations in the MECP2 gene, which encodes a transcriptional regulator that

binds to methylated cytosine bases in DNA, regulating gene expression and chromatin remodeling. The gene product was initially thought to act predominantly as a transcriptional repressor, but studies of both the mouse model and human induced pluripotent stem cells have shown that overall gene expression is reduced when the gene is knocked out. Among the genes that have reduced expression in neurons is BDNF, encoding brainderived neurotrophic factor. Studies in mouse models of Rett have found that overexpression of BDNF improves the knock-out phenotype. Other growth factors that increase gene expression but have more favorable neuropharmacological profiles, including insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), have also improved aspects of the mouse phenotype, leading to optimism about clinical trials of related compounds. Phase II human trials with both molecules are currently underway. One might think that such a global abnormality in gene expression would lead to a very severe phenotype, but because females are mosaic, with approximately

half of their brain cells expressing one normal copy of MECP2 (due to random X-inactivation), they are viable but manifest the devastating Rett phenotype. Boys, who have a single X chromosome and thus a single copy of MECP2, typically die soon after birth or in infancy if they carry a loss-of-function mutation in MECP2 . The role of X-inactivation in the survival of female mutation carriers and the observation that favorable skewing (a shift toward preferential silencing of the

mutant X) leads to a less severe clinical course have generated considerable interest in therapeutic strategies aimed at reactivating the normal but silenced X chromosomes in females with Rett syndrome. Although one can imagine considerable challenges resulting from the reactivation of many genes on a normally silenced chromosome, a recent study has reported a mouse mutation that leads to both alleles expressing MeCP2 without wholesale activation of genes on the X chromosome. Interestingly, in 2005, duplications spanning MECP2 were identified in males with severe intellectual

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1532

disability. This condition, called MECP2 duplication

syndrome (MDS), includes autistic features, hypoto-

nia, epilepsy, gait abnormalities, and recurrent infec-

tions. Like Rett syndrome, it has also been productively modeled in rodents. However, unlike Rett, the majority of identified cases are familial and not sporadic in nature. In these cases, female carriers are often healthy enough (due to favorable X-inactivation) to reproduce and transmit the duplication to boys with only a single X chromosome. Williams Syndrome

Williams syndrome is caused by a segmental deletion

of about 27 genes on the long arm of chromosome 7

and is characterized by mild to moderate intellectual

disability, connective tissue abnormalities, cardiovascular defects, distinctive facies, and a behavioral phenotype characterized by increased sociability, preserved language abilities, affinity for music, and impaired visuospatial capabilities. The disorder occurs in 1 in 10,000 live births. The connective tissue and key cardiovascular symptoms have been attributed to the loss of the gene ELN (elastin), although no specific genes within the deleted interval have yet been definitively shown to result in the behavioral phenotype. Nonetheless, the social cognitive features of Williams syndrome are particularly intriguing: The degree of interest in social interaction is striking, leading to a nearly universal loss of reticence with strangers in children with the syndrome. In contrast to the almost complete absence of social anxiety, individuals with Williams syndrome have a high degree of general anxiety and isolated phobias. Finally, the affinity for and interest in music among a very large percentage of 7q11.23 deletion carriers, although less well characterized, are striking. Conversely, duplication of the identical region of chromosome 7, including the same 26 to 28 genes, is a significant risk factor for ASD and other neurodevel-

opmental syndromes apart from Williams syndrome. The observation of contrasting social phenotypes depending on whether there is loss or gain of a small region of the genome is fascinating. Whether social functioning in William syndrome is truly the opposite of that seen in ASD, as is sometimes argued, seems less interesting than the conclusion that this region of the genome must contain one or more genes that modulate social affiliation. Consequently, the molecular characterization of these deletion and duplication syndromes and intensive investigation of their impact on the development of molecular, cellular, and circuit properties in the central nervous system are particularly important.

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Nonimprinted genes Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

Angelman Syndrome and Prader-Willi Syndrome

Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes are paradig-

## matic examples of genetic syndromes that result from mutations in genes subject to parental imprinting. To

understand these conditions, one must not only know the associated DNA lesion but also its parental origin. For example, both syndromes most often result from the loss of the identical region of chromosome 15 (15q11-q13) but have readily distinguishable pheno-

types. Angelman syndrome is characterized by severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, absence of speech, hyperactivity, and inappropriate laughter. In contrast, Prader-Willi is characterized by infantile hypotonia, mild to moderate intellectual disability, obesity, highly perseverative behavior, social disability, and diminished or absent satiety. How these contrasting phenotypes result from the loss of the identical set of genes confounded medical geneticists until about the year 2000. The mystery was

A Normal


solved by the discovery that the chromosomal interval

is imprinted. Specifically, within this region, multiple

genes are expressed only on the paternally inherited

chromosome (maternal imprinting), whereas at least two genes, UBE3A and ATP10C, are expressed only on the maternally inherited chromosome (paternal imprinting) (Figure 62–7). This discovery, along with a series of studies that allowed for fine mapping of the interval, provided a parsimonious explanation for the clinical observations.

If the deletion of proximal chromosome 15 involved the maternal chromosome, the patient would suffer the loss of the protein product of UBE3A, a ubiquitin-protein ligase that stimulates the degradation and turnover of other proteins, leading to Angelman syndrome. Alternatively, if the paternal chromosome carried the deletion, UBE3A would be expressed normally, but a series of other genes, including several strongly implicated in Prader-Willi syndrome, would be lost.

B Spontaneous 15q11-13 deletion

Paternal deletion

<!-- image -->

Maternal A ON

(paternally

Figure 62–7 Imprinting in Prader-Willi and Angelman syn-

dromes. Approximately 70% of Prader-Willi and Angelman

syndrome patients inherit chromosome 15 from one parent

with spontaneous (noninherited) deletions of the q11-13 interval. This interval contains imprinted genes with alleles that are either expressed or not depending on whether the chromosome was inherited from the father or mother. If the chromosome with the deletion is from the father, Prader-Willi

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1533

## Father's alleles

Mother's

alleles

Son

Gene B not expressed

Prader-Willi syndrome Gene A not expressed Angelman syndrome

syndrome occurs because maternally imprinted genes on the

corresponding interval of the intact maternal chromosome

(gene B, for example) are not expressed. If the chromosome

with the deletion is from the mother, the gene for ubiquitin ligase (UBE3A) will not be expressed in offspring because of its normal inactivation on the paternal chromosome caused by imprinting; loss of expression of this gene leads to Angelman syndrome.

18/12/20 11:51 AM

15q11-13

deletion A ON

B OFF

Maternal deletion

Father's Mother's

alleles alleles Son

A OFF

B ON

15q11-13

deletion


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

The solution to the phenotypic complexity seen in

15q11-13 deletion also led to a series of observations

that revealed other previously unappreciated genetic

mechanisms of behavioral pathology. For example, deletions on the maternal chromosome not directly involving the UBE3A gene were also observed in rare patients with Angelman syndrome, contributing to the identification of an Angelman syndrome imprinting control region mapping some distance from UBE3A but within the deletion interval. Similarly, the discovery of both Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes in patients without deletions of any kind led to the recognition that in a small percentage of both conditions two copies of a chromosome from the same parent were present (with no representation from the other parent), a phenomenon called uniparental disomy . Both syndromes have complex behavioral phenotypes. Social disability is characteristic of Prader-Willi; with Angelman syndrome, the overlap with ASD has

been more difficult to establish because of the marked intellectual disability associated with the syndrome. Differentiating intellectual disability from ASD in individuals with very low IQ can be quite challenging. Nonetheless, there are multiple clear molecular and behavioral links with ASD. For example, duplications of the 15q11-13 region are a well-established risk factor for nonsyndromic ASD (see below), and functional de novo missense mutations in the gene UBE3A have been found in individuals with ASD without all of the features of Angelman syndrome. Neurodevelopmental Syndromes Provide Insight Into the Mechanisms of Social Cognition

## Although the fragile X, Rett, Williams, Angelman, and Prader-Willi syndromes collectively account for a small fraction of the burden of social disability in the popu-

lation, studies of these disorders have contributed to major advances in the understanding of normal brain development, neurodevelopmental syndromes in general, and the mechanisms underlying social disability in particular. A number of biological processes identified in the study of these disorders—including the contribution of epigenetic mechanisms and chromatin dynamics, synaptic dysfunction, and the role of aberrant local protein synthesis—have all turned out to be important initial clues to the biological and developmental mechanisms underlying nonsyndromic forms of ASD. Moreover, characterization of the genetics underlying certain neurodevelopmental syndromes provided some of the earliest examples of a phenomenon that is now well accepted in ASD—either losses or gains of identical risk genes or regions may lead to

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1534

neurodevelopmental disorders, sometimes with over-

lapping and sometimes contrasting phenotypes.

Importantly, in addition to the first clues regard-

ing molecular mechanisms, recent studies of a number of Mendelian syndromes have challenged conven-

tional wisdom by highlighting, in model systems, the potential reversibility of developmental phenotypes, even into adulthood. These observations, particularly with regard to Rett, Angelman, MDS, and fragile X syndromes, defied the long and generally held belief that the deficits associated with these types of severe syndromes are unchangeable. Moreover, the relevant studies have underscored the fact that a range of manipulations—from genetic, to pharmacological, to the more recent use of antisense oligonucleotides (in the case of MEC2 duplication and Angelman syndromes)—have all been successful in reversing phenotype. These findings provide not only an avenue forward for the development of rational therapies in humans but also a critical antidote to the penchant for nihilistic

views of therapeutics development in neurodevelopmental disorders. In short, these findings have collectively, and now repeatedly, reinforced the notion that rationally designed therapies may reverse key symptoms long after initial pathology has begun to unfold in brain development. The question of how much of the core symptomatology seen in nonsyndromic ASD is a consequence of ongoing functional derangements, versus what would more traditionally be considered developmental pathology, remains to be clarified. One should note, however, that even with the limited treatments available, the observation that some children improve years after the onset of symptoms suggests that aspects of ASD pathology are not entirely static and may ultimately yield to the development of novel biologically driven treatment approaches. The Complex Genetics of Common Forms of

Autism Spectrum Disorder Are Being Clarified

## The recent discovery of genes causing idiopathic ASD—once a scientific quagmire—has been among

the most dramatic success stories in the field of

human genetics. The combination of high-throughput genomic technologies—including the ability to assay common and rare variations in both the sequence and structure of DNA—the consolidation of large patient cohorts, and considerable investment in ASD research has transformed the field. Initial breakthroughs can be traced to studies of the genes encoding the family of neuroligins—cell

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

adhesion molecules found at postsynaptic densities of

glutaminergic synapses (Chapter 48). At the beginning

of this century, the group led by Thomas Bourgeron,

a geneticist at the Pasteur Institute, first identified putatively deleterious coding mutations in the genes coding for neuroligin 4X (loss-of-function) and neuroligin 3X (missense). About 6 months after the initial report on the loss-of-function mutation in NLGN4X, a nearly identical loss-of-function mutation in the same gene was found linked to both intellectual disability and ASD in a large pedigree. The relevance of the neuroligin 3X mutation to ASD has taken longer to clarify. Contemporary studies provide statistical evidence that NLGN3X is a probable, but not yet definitive, ASD risk gene. Additional studies of large cohorts will clarify this question. In retrospect, these findings were prescient. The two papers on neuroligins pointed to the importance of loss-of-function heterozygous mutations leading not

only to ASD but to a wide range of neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlighted a role for synaptic proteins at the excitatory synapse. Moreover, in addition to being a harbinger of the contributions of both rare and de novo mutations (Chapter 2), the reported findings from Bourgeron's group also hinted, in retrospect, at a female protective effect as well as a paternal origin of de novo point mutations. In the initial report, the unaffected mother carried a de novo loss-of-function mutation on her paternally inherited X chromosome, which she passed to two affected sons. Several years later, two key findings further ushered in the modern age of reliable and reproducible genetic studies in ASD. First, papers in 2006 and 2007


function) proved to be elevated in individuals with

autism, pointing to the aggregation of causal muta-

tions in affected individuals, not hypermutability, as

an explanation for the excess rate(s) of de novo events in affected individuals. A considerable investment in studying copy number variations in simplex families has resulted in a steadily expanding list of copy number variations that

clearly and dramatically increase the risk for ASD. At present, about a dozen genomic intervals reach genome-wide significance based on genome-wide screening of cases for de novo mutations (Figure 62–8). As a result, the American College of Medical Genetics now considers screening for copy number variations the standard of care for an individual presenting with ASD of unknown etiology. Studies of de novo mutations have advanced throughout the second decade of this millennium, leading to the discovery that, similar to de novo copy

number variations, de novo changes in the sequence of DNA—both single nucleotide variants and insertions or deletions (indels)—also contribute to ASD risk and can similarly be used to identify specific risk genes. Recent reports have now leveraged this approach to include more than 100 genes carrying large-effect single nucleotide variants and indel mutations that disrupt the function of the encoded protein (ie, likely genedisruptive [LGD] mutations) (Chapter 2). Several associated findings deserve mention here. First, although the contribution of de novo mutations to the risk for ASD in the total population is quite small

-(in the neighborhood of 3%), the proportion of individuals with large-effect de novo mutations who are seen in clinical settings and recruited for genetic studies is quite significant, as high as 40% of girls. The reason for this apparent contradiction is that most of the risk to the population writ large is carried in small-effect common variations that in most individuals are not sufficient to result in them crossing a diagnostic threshold for ASD. In short, most individuals carrying some degree of risk in the population never show overt social impairment and do not come to clinical attention. Conversely, individuals with large-effect de novo copy number variations, single nucleotide variants, and indels are much more likely to have significant clinical manifestations and seek medical attention. Second, studies of de novo single nucleotide variants and indels in ASD using exome sequencing have found that the rate of de novo mutations increases

with the father's age. Consistent with this observation is the finding that the vast majority of deleterious de novo sequence mutations in ASD cases are present on the paternally inherited chromosome. Although the

18/12/20 11:51 AM

reported on the observation of rare de novo heterozygous copy number variations (Chapter 2) in children with ASD and intellectual disability. These studies focused specifically on idiopathic, nonsyndromic ASD and on families with only a single affected individual (simplex families). Both papers reported high rates of relatively large copy number variations among individuals with both intellectual and social disability. Second, it was not clear if individuals with ASD sim ply had more chromosomal abnormalities than those without. However, this question was soon answered by studies from multiple laboratories. De novo copy number variations did not appear to be distributed randomly throughout the genome but tended to cluster in distinct regions of the genome, suggesting that the increased rate in such cases was a consequence of an accumulation of specific risk events. Moreover, as higher-resolution genomic assays began to be applied, similar results emerged: Only certain subsets of mutations (eg, point mutations that disrupt gene

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1535


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

MYT1L

DNMT3A

SPAST

spectrum disorders (ASDs).  The figure identifies 71 genes and

SETD5

SLC6A1

copy number variations (CNVs) associated with risk for ASDs based predominantly on the recurrence of de novo mutations. Abbreviations in blue shading denote genes with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.01; abbreviations in yellow shading denote an FDR between 0.01 and 0.05; and abbreviations with absolute increase in risk with age is small, this observa-

<!-- image -->

tion nonetheless provides a conceptual framework for

understanding secular increases in ASD prevalence. It

also sets the stage for further studies of the impact of environmental factors in increasing de novo mutations

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1536





no shading denote an FDR greater than 0.05 and less than 0.1.

Green bars identify CNVs with an FDR less than 0.05. Data from

Sanders et al. 2015. Statistical analysis was performed using the

methods described in Sanders et al. 2015. Five additional genes with names underlined cause the syndromic forms of ASD discussed in the chapter text. Gene identification in ASD is continuing at a rapid pace. Up-to-date lists of associated genes and genomic regions can be found at https://gene.sfari.org. and thereby potentially increasing the true incidence

of clinical ASD cases.

The relationship of de novo large-effect mutations

to intellectual disability has been the subject of considerable discussion, with some contending that de novo

18/12/20 11:51 AM

SYNGAP1

PTK7

USP45

ARID1B

GRIN2B

MIB1

KATNAL2

NLGN3

FMR1

MECP2

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

large-effect mutations are typically seen in ASD with


variants. Moreover, there is evidence for recessive

intellectual disability. Although it is the case that de

novo mutations that are damaging (either copy num-

ber variations or single nucleotide variants) are more prevalent in ASD patients with lower IQ, it is also the case that mutations that confer ASD risk are found across the entire IQ spectrum, reinforcing the idea that domains of cognitive and social functioning are to some degree separable. One notable difference between the genetics of ASD and other common disorders, including schizophrenia, has been the lack of progress using genome-wide asso- forms of ASD as well. These have initially been iden- tified predominantly in consanguineous populations via the identification of homozygous loss-of-function mutations—that is, the identical damaging allele on both the paternally and the maternally inherited chromosomes—including in the genes CNTNAP2 , BCKDK, K, and NHE9. Moreover, several recent studies have highlighted the contribution of compound heterozygote mutations to ASD risk—that is, different mutations mapping to the same gene on the maternally and paternally inherited chromosome—in populations with low rates of consanguinity. A key point is that the pursuit and discovery of different types of mutations may help advance the science in different ways. For example, rare de novo

MTHFR , high-effect mutations can be quickly studied in model systems. Also, common variants provide an opportunity to assess overall polygenic risk in research cohorts, an approach that may be highly useful for multimodal studies, such as those that integrate neuroimaging with genetic data, or other investigations linking human behaviors to genotypes. Finally, very rare homozygous/recessive variants mitigate some of the challenges of modeling haploinsufficiency. Even though heritability—the proportion of the phenotypic variance due to genetic factors—is very high for ASD, environmental factors also play a role,

-although few specific environmental factors have been conclusively identified. Infections by viruses (eg, rubella, measles, influenza, herpes simplex, and cytomegalovirus) in utero may contribute to the etiology of ASD. There is substantial evidence that mediators of immune functions also play a role in brain development including synaptogenesis. Given the complexity of ASD and its various forms, it is likely that a variety of etiologies will ultimately be discovered—some purely genetic, others that depend on combinations of genetic risk factors and environmental factors, and some purely environmental causes. Genetics and Neuropathology Are Illuminating

the Neural Mechanisms of Autism

ciation studies (Chapter 2). To date, only a handful of common genetic variants have been found that are significantly and reproducibly associated with ASD risk. Moreover, earlier conventional wisdom about the contribution of candidate genes such as 5-HTT, T, or OXT polymorphisms is highly uncertain, based on the lack of findings from genome-wide association studies and the fact that these associations derived from an approach that has been shown empirically to be unreliable for gene discovery in complex common disorders. On the other hand, as noted, there is very strong evidence that common variation plays a substantial role in the population risk for ASD. Indeed, genome-wide association studies that have inferred the degree of contribution from this type of variation agree that the lion's share of vulnerability resides in common variation. One can reconcile these observa tions by noting that for those disorders, such as ASD, that markedly impair reproductive fitness, only common genetic variations carrying small effects remain in the human population over many generations. Those with larger effects would either be driven to low frequencies or removed entirely by natural selection. In addition, sample sizes for case-control genome-wide association studies of ASD to date have been more modest than those that have led to the marked success in identifying common polymorphisms associated with schizophrenia. In short, limited power is almost certainly a key limitation in identifying the common small-effect alleles contributing to ASD. The relative success in identifying de novo mutations does not suggest that these are the only important mechanisms of ASD risk. Recent progress in this area

is the result of a fortuitous combination of the largeeffect size of the mutations, their location in the most easily interpreted portion of the genome (the coding region), and their low base rate in typically developing individuals. With regard to population risk, however, common noncoding, small-effect alleles are likely to collectively account for a greater overall proportion of the liability for ASD compared to rare high-effect

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1537

Spectrum Disorder

## Genetic Findings Can Be Interpreted Using Systems Biological Approaches

## The recent advances in gene discovery are a particularly exciting development, offering many opportunities for biological analyses using an increasing armamen-

tarium of in vitro and in vivo methods. In addition,

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

contemporary genomic approaches, examining large

sections of the genome simultaneously, allow for

unbiased approaches to be used in the study of groups

of risk genes in an effort to identify points of convergence among disparate ASD genes. To date, biological approaches that examine multiple systems have been divided roughly into two types of efforts: those that attempt to identify the types of

biological processes reflected in the growing list of ASD genes and those that attempt to identify biological points of convergence at either the molecular or cellular level. The latter approach is based on the notion that multiple types of genetically driven perturbations in differing pathways may lead to a common phenotype due to their convergence on specific cell types, regions, or circuits at specific time points during the development of the human brain. Biological processes or pathways in which ASD risk genes are present in a greater proportion than expected under the null hypothesis include chromatin

modification, synaptic function, the WNT signaling pathway, and targets of FMRP. This list is clearly not exhaustive. For example, what we learned from genes involved in genetic syndromes as well as genes that cause nonsyndromic or idiopathic ASD implicates synaptic local protein synthesis as well as neurogenesis as points of potential biological convergence of disparate risk mutations. Some variability in these findings is almost certainly attributable to different selection criteria for ASD risk genes as well as differences in the data used

to annotate their function. This latter issue is important to keep in mind as numerous confounding factors are inherent in current efforts to annotate the biological processes assigned to a given gene or protein. These include the sources of data. For example, the assigned function of a gene can be markedly influenced by publication bias, whether in vitro or in vivo assays were employed, and what types of tissues and model systems were used to generate the data. Moreover, most functional annotations provide limited information on the time course of function for genes that may be developmentally regulated and biologically pleiotropic. Nonetheless, it is the increasing consistency in findings that is most striking. Despite the varying approaches, the biological processes noted above have been repeatedly identified among diverse rigorous studies. As noted, an alternative approach to determining where multiple autism risk genes overlap involves examining not just their function but also their devel-

opmental expression pattern. Such studies are predicated on the notion that multiple risk genes may have different overt functions but share the ability to disrupt

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1538

the same circuit, cellular, or developmental process.

For example, a mutation in a gene encoding a protein

known to mediate synaptic adhesion and a separate

mutation in a gene encoding a chromatin modifier may both lead to identical abnormalities in the development of early cortical striatal connections. In such cases, the timing and location of the perturbation may be as relevant as a specific molecular pathway or the assigned molecular function of the individual gene(s). These studies have also tended to rely on assaying developmental expression trajectories genome-wide to minimize some of the confounding factors associated with other available annotation systems. For instance, it is now possible to assay essentially every gene in the genome simultaneously—eliminating the need to rely on prior research to assign a specific function to a gene. Moreover, such studies increasingly examine gene expression in human and/or nonhuman primate brain, mitigating some of the challenges of relying on in vitro data. Of course, such studies must still contend with the limits of resolution of expression analyses as well as a less than complete (and potentially biased) representation of different brain regions. Nonetheless, to date, the degree of agreement among varying studies is reassuring. Despite differences in analytical and statistical approaches used in these types of studies, there has been general agreement to date that ASD risk genes point to

vulnerability in human mid-fetal cortical development. There is also emerging evidence that these genes point to the involvement of both deep and upper layer projection neurons in cerebral cortex and of striatum and cere -bellum (although the data on developmental expression in these regions remain limited in publicly accessible databases compared to cortical regions). Autism Spectrum Disorder Genes Have Been Studied in a Variety of Model Systems

## As a result of the tremendous progress of late, even a cursory description of the literature on the study

of ASD in animal models is beyond the scope of

this chapter. In part, this is a consequence of the sheer number of studies; in part, it is a product of the marked differences in the type of perturbation studied (eg, well-validated genetic models, "candidate gene" models, pharmacological models such as valproate exposure, or maternal immune activation). Moreover, differences in brain regions, cell types, developmental periods, and the biological processes assayed make summary generalizations problematic. In short, no consensus has yet been reached regarding the range of pathophysiological mechanisms relevant to ASD.

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

Nonetheless, given recent progress in human genet-

ics, it is increasingly important to distinguish between

models based on reproducible genetic findings, includ-

ing those leading to syndromic ASD, and models based on unreliable candidate gene loci or solely on behaviors (ie, those that appear to reproduce human symptoms). Given the multiple options now available to study genetic variations that demonstrably increase the risk in humans for ASD in the phenotypes of interest, the study of models with more tenuous links to human pathophysiology is increasingly difficult to justify. Many publications reporting rodent models of ASD, regardless of their origins, focus on phenotypes that resemble symptoms seen in the human syndrome,

including changes in social interactions, vocalizations, and behaviors reminiscent of human anxiety or aggression. Even with a bias toward publishing positive findings, results vary dramatically. Of note, there has been a long-standing debate over the relevance of animal models for ASD, given the important differences in brain development, organization, and function between humans and the most commonly used experimental animals. Nevertheless, unbiased assessments of a wide range of animal behaviors—not necessarily prioritizing those that "look" like core ASD symptoms—may well provide a valuable window into pathophysiological mechanisms. For example, some of the most commonly observed phenotypes reported to date across various ASD genetic models (and by various laboratories) involve motor behavior. In this case, it seems far less important that the observed behaviors are reminiscent of core diagnostic features in humans than that the observations suggest an important point of biological convergence, providing clues to cell types, circuits, and processes involved in ASD. Although rodent models continue to dominate the ASD literature, a wide range of other models have already provided important insights into biology. These

include the fruit fly, worm, zebrafish, frogs, voles, nonhuman primates, induced pluripotent stem cells and brain organoids, and human postmortem samples. Given the complexity of the problems at hand, the differing strengths and limitations of various models, and the important differences in brain structure and development across species, continued progress will likely require integrating data across a wide range of existing models, from flies and worms to humans. Postmortem and Brain Tissue Studies Provide Insight Into Autism Spectrum Disorder Pathology

## The neuropathology of autism at a microscopic level is also not yet clear, but several studies provide evidence

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1539


for the potential for multiple anatomical correlates.

The multiple correlates may in part be due to the small

number of brains available for pathological analysis.

Moreover, only a small fraction of these have undergone quantitative analysis. Another problem is the frequent occurrence of epilepsy. Approximately 30% of individuals with autism also have seizure disorders, and seizures may damage the amygdala and many other brain regions implicated in ASD. One of the earliest and most consistent anatomical findings in ASD has been the lower number of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum in some individuals. When

neural stains are used to mark cell bodies, gaps in the orderly arrays of Purkinje cells are noticeable. Whether this reduction in cell number is because of ASD, epilepsy, or the co-occurrence of both disorders is not clear. It is also not clear whether the reduced number of Purkinje cells is characteristic of ASD in particular or neurodevelopmental disorders more generally. A wide variety of cerebellar changes were identified in cases of idiopathic intellectual disability, in Williams syndrome, and in other neurodevelopmental disorders. A few cases of alterations of brain stem nuclei that are connected to the cerebellum, such as the olivary complex, have also been reported. Finally, contemporary analyses have found considerable heterogeneity in cell number, with only a subset of samples showing a decrease in the number of Purkinje cells. Microscopic abnormalities have also been observed in the autistic cerebral cortex, including defects in the migration of cells into the cortex, such as ectopias

(nests of cells in white matter that failed to enter the cortex). It has also been proposed that the columnar organization of the autistic cortex is abnormal. These findings still await confirmation in larger studies using quantitative strategies. Finally, one study found fewer neurons in the mature amygdala of people with ASD without epilepsy. In one of the few reported descriptions of live pathological tissue samples from patients with ASD (removed from three patients during surgery for

intractable epilepsy), multiple cytoarchitectural abnormalities were identified in the temporal cortices. These individuals all carried rare recessive loss-of-function mutations in the gene contactin associated protein-like 2 . Multiple histological abnormalities were observed in these patients, including areas of cortical thickening and blurring of the boundary between gray matter and white matter. Moreover, the authors described neurons in multiple cortical regions that were abnormally organized into tightly packed columns or clusters. In both the hippocampus and temporal cortex, the number of neurons was increased, and many of the

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

neurons had abnormal shapes instead of their pyrami-

dal morphology. Given the presence of gross temporal

lobe abnormalities visible on MRI in two of the three

patients, the rare recessive genetic contribution, and the particularly severe seizure disorder, the generalizability of these findings to idiopathic ASD remains in question. The notion overall that there are neuroanatomical changes in some ASD patients is supported by several other lines of evidence. A number of well-supported

and well-characterized ASD risk genes (eg, PTEN mutations) are associated with increases in brain size ranging from modest (eg, CHD8 loss-of-function mutations) to frank macrocephaly. In addition, ASD is often associated with microcephaly. Girls with Rett syndrome have acquired microcephaly, suggesting, not surprisingly, that multiple anatomical derangements may occur in social disability phenotypes. Advances in Basic and Translational

Science Provide a Path to Elucidate the

Pathophysiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder

## A full understanding of the neurobiological basis of the many neurodevelopmental disorders that lead to

social and intellectual disability will require the con-

vergence of neuroscience, other medical disciplines, computational biology, and genomics. A bottom-up approach—progressing from the identification of genes responsible for cognitive and behavioral disorders to an understanding of their effects on brain development— is already providing some key insights. At the same time, a top-down approach may also be highly productive by identifying and defining critical neural circuits involved in social function and dysfunction. Fortunately, the tools available to pursue both approaches are increasingly accessible, from highthroughput whole-genome sequencing to rapidly

advancing informatics pipelines, genome editing, optogenetics and other methods to study circuits in vivo, single cell technologies, improved neuroimaging methods and technologies, and the development of tractable human and nonhuman primate neural models, including brain organoids. Although there has been great progress in elaborating the genetics and biology of ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders, the findings from

genomic studies have also pointed to some key challenges: At the most basic level, the translation of these discoveries to an understanding of pathophysiology is limited by the current state of knowledge regarding brain organization and development. It seems likely

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1540

that without a detailed cellular understanding of the

brains of humans, nonhuman primates, and other

model systems, it will be challenging to interpret the

wide variety of genetic perturbations and move from an understanding of the biology to any understanding of the pathogenesis. It is also reasonable to presume that to be most useful for the disorders of the type discussed in this chapter, this type of map will have to capture developmental dimensions. It is exciting and heartening, then, that the recent BRAIN Initiative, other large-scale governmental efforts, and the efforts of private foundations have all highlighted foundational knowledge as a key to success. There is little doubt that the distance between our knowledge of clinical phenomenology, genetics, imaging, and neuropathology on the one hand and, on the

other, the development of novel treatments that will profoundly improve the lives of severely affected individuals can seem daunting. At the same time, it is heartening to see the progress with Mendelian neurodevelopmental disorders, where some clinical trials of rational therapies have been completed and others are currently underway. Although some of the early results have been disappointing, the mere fact that the understanding of these syndromes has advanced to this point is cause for continued optimism. Along these lines, it is useful to consider the required extent of revision of this chapter from the prior volume to the current one. The ability to confidently assign large-effect genetic risk at nearly 100 genomic loci and genes, the emerging consensus regarding what types of molecular processes and pathways are involved, the first glimpses of the developmental characteristics, and the initiation of biologically driven therapeutic trials have all emerged over a relatively short period of time. It is exciting to speculate where the field could be by the publication of the next revision of this book. Highlights

1. Neurodevelopmental syndromes can involve

varying degrees of impairment in different cog-

nitive domains. Syndromes that involve dys-

- function in the social realm, with or without involvement of general cognition or perception, are the focus of this chapter. 2. Autism is the paradigmatic social disability syndrome, first described in the literature in 1943 by Leo Kanner. Today, autism is considered a
- spectrum of disorders with two defining diagnostic features: fundamentally impaired social communication and stereotyped behaviors and/

18/12/20 11:51 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

neurons had abnormal shapes instead of their pyrami-

dal morphology. Given the presence of gross temporal

lobe abnormalities visible on MRI in two of the three

patients, the rare recessive genetic contribution, and the particularly severe seizure disorder, the generalizability of these findings to idiopathic ASD remains in question. The notion overall that there are neuroanatomical changes in some ASD patients is supported by several other lines of evidence. A number of well-supported

and well-characterized ASD risk genes (eg, PTEN mutations) are associated with increases in brain size ranging from modest (eg, CHD8 loss-of-function mutations) to frank macrocephaly. In addition, ASD is often associated with microcephaly. Girls with Rett syndrome have acquired microcephaly, suggesting, not surprisingly, that multiple anatomical derangements may occur in social disability phenotypes. Advances in Basic and Translational

Science Provide a Path to Elucidate the

Pathophysiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder

## A full understanding of the neurobiological basis of the many neurodevelopmental disorders that lead to

social and intellectual disability will require the con-

vergence of neuroscience, other medical disciplines, computational biology, and genomics. A bottom-up approach—progressing from the identification of genes responsible for cognitive and behavioral disorders to an understanding of their effects on brain development— is already providing some key insights. At the same time, a top-down approach may also be highly productive by identifying and defining critical neural circuits involved in social function and dysfunction. Fortunately, the tools available to pursue both approaches are increasingly accessible, from highthroughput whole-genome sequencing to rapidly

advancing informatics pipelines, genome editing, optogenetics and other methods to study circuits in vivo, single cell technologies, improved neuroimaging methods and technologies, and the development of tractable human and nonhuman primate neural models, including brain organoids. Although there has been great progress in elaborating the genetics and biology of ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders, the findings from

genomic studies have also pointed to some key challenges: At the most basic level, the translation of these discoveries to an understanding of pathophysiology is limited by the current state of knowledge regarding brain organization and development. It seems likely

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1540

that without a detailed cellular understanding of the

brains of humans, nonhuman primates, and other

model systems, it will be challenging to interpret the

wide variety of genetic perturbations and move from an understanding of the biology to any understanding of the pathogenesis. It is also reasonable to presume that to be most useful for the disorders of the type discussed in this chapter, this type of map will have to capture developmental dimensions. It is exciting and heartening, then, that the recent BRAIN Initiative, other large-scale governmental efforts, and the efforts of private foundations have all highlighted foundational knowledge as a key to success. There is little doubt that the distance between our knowledge of clinical phenomenology, genetics, imaging, and neuropathology on the one hand and, on the

other, the development of novel treatments that will profoundly improve the lives of severely affected individuals can seem daunting. At the same time, it is heartening to see the progress with Mendelian neurodevelopmental disorders, where some clinical trials of rational therapies have been completed and others are currently underway. Although some of the early results have been disappointing, the mere fact that the understanding of these syndromes has advanced to this point is cause for continued optimism. Along these lines, it is useful to consider the required extent of revision of this chapter from the prior volume to the current one. The ability to confidently assign large-effect genetic risk at nearly 100 genomic loci and genes, the emerging consensus regarding what types of molecular processes and pathways are involved, the first glimpses of the developmental characteristics, and the initiation of biologically driven therapeutic trials have all emerged over a relatively short period of time. It is exciting to speculate where the field could be by the publication of the next revision of this book. Highlights

1. Neurodevelopmental syndromes can involve

varying degrees of impairment in different cog-

nitive domains. Syndromes that involve dys-

- function in the social realm, with or without involvement of general cognition or perception, are the focus of this chapter. 2. Autism is the paradigmatic social disability syndrome, first described in the literature in 1943 by Leo Kanner. Today, autism is considered a
- spectrum of disorders with two defining diagnostic features: fundamentally impaired social communication and stereotyped behaviors and/

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

or highly restricted interests. The prevalence of

autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is estimated to

be at least 1.5% in developed countries and is

- much more frequent in males than females. 3. Both environmental factors and myriad genes contribute to ASD risk. This genetic complexity resulted for several decades in scant progress
- in efforts to map specific ASD risk genes and genomic regions (loci). 4. The earliest clues to both the genetics and neurobiology of ASD emerged from early investigations of neurodevelopmental syndromes that manifest


ASD, studies of Mendelian syndromes have chal-

lenged conventional wisdom by highlighting the

potential reversibility of developmental phe-

- notypes. These observations, particularly with regard to Rett syndrome and fragile X syndrome, have generated renewed optimism about the opportunities for rational development of therapeutic treatments. 10. Multiple methods are now converging to elaborate the pathology underlying ASD, including gene discovery and systems biology, model sys-
- -tems approaches, neuroimaging studies, and neuropathological studies. The key challenge going forward will be to move from a general understanding of biology to an actionable understanding of pathophysiology.
- both with intellectual disability and social impairment. These include, among others, fragile X syndrome, Rett syndrome, Williams syndrome, and Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes. 5. High-throughput genomic technologies, the consolidation of large patient cohorts, and considerable investment in ASD research have trans
- formed the field of gene discovery in idiopathic ASD. At present, dozens of specific genes and genomic regions have been reliably and reproducibly associated with risk for ASD. 6. Recent progress in the genetics of common forms of ASD has emerged from a focus on rare and sporadic (de novo) mutations in the coding por-
- tion of the genome. On average, these mutations carry much larger biological effects than have been identified in studies of other psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, where many common genetic risk variants have been identified, each with a small effect. 7. Studies of both genetic syndromes and idiopathic ASD have begun to reveal processes, pathways, and developmental epochs involved in patho-
- physiology. These include epigenetic mechanisms and chromatin dynamics, synaptic dysfunction, and the role of aberrant local protein synthesis. Recent studies of genetically determined ASDs have also shown that human mid-fetal cortical development and glutamatergic neurons are particularly vulnerable. 8. The current availability of a significant number of confirmed ASD loci, both for syndromic as well as idiopathic forms of the disorder, provides
- a solid foundation for neurobiological studies. These advances provide a strong link to human pathophysiology, including potential traction on the question of cause versus effect, given that germline genetic changes are present prior to the earliest stages of brain development. 9. In addition to providing some of the first clues regarding molecular mechanisms of idiopathic

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1541

Matthew W. State

Selected Reading

de la Torre-Ubieta L, Won H, Stein JL, Geschwind DH. 2016.

Advancing the understanding of autism disease mecha-

nisms through genetics. Nat Med 22:345–361.

- Frith U. 2008. Autism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. Happé F, Frith U (eds). 2010. Autism and Talent. Oxford:
- Oxford Univ. Press. (First published as a special issue of Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Series B, Vol.
- 364, 2009.) Klin A, Jones W, Schultz R, Volkmar F, Cohen D. 2002. Defining and quantifying the social phenotype in autism. Am J Psychiatry 159:895–908.
- Sesan N, State MW. 2018. Lost in translation: traversing the complex path from genomics to therapeutics in autism spectrum disorders. Neuron 100:406–423.
- Zoghbi HY, Bear MF. 2012. Synaptic dysfunction in neurodevelopmental disorders associated with autism and intellectual disabilities. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
- 4:a009886. References

Amaral DG, Schumann CM, Nordahl CW. 2008. Neuroanat-

omy of autism. Trends Neurosci 31:137–145.

Anderson DK, Liang JW, Lord C. 2014. Predicting young

- adult outcome among more and less cognitively able individuals with autism spectrum disorders. J Child Psychol
- Psychiatry 55:485–494.

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Baron-Cohen S, Cox A, Baird G, et al. 1996. Psychological

markers in the detection of autism in infancy in a large

population. Br J Psychiatry 168:158–163.

- Baron-Cohen S, Leslie AM, Frith U. 1985. Does the autistic child have a "theory of mind"? Cognition 21:37–46. Bear MF, Huber KM, Warren ST. 2004. The mGluR theory of
- fragile X syndrome. Trends Neurosci 27:370–377. Cassidy SB, Morris CA. 2002. Behavioral phenotypes in
- genetic syndromes: genetic clues to human behavior. Adv Pediatr 49:59–86.
- Castelli F, Happé F, Frith CD, Frith U. 2002. Autism, Asperger syndrome and brain mechanisms for the attribution of mental states to animated shapes. Brain 125:1839–1849.
- De Rubeis S, He X, Goldberg AP, et al. 2014. Synaptic, transcriptional and chromatin genes disrupted in autism. Nature 515:209–215.
- Deuse L, Rademacher LM, Winkler L, et al. 2016. Neural correlates of naturalistic social cognition: brain-behavior relationships in healthy adults. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
- 11:1741–1751. Dolen G, Bear MF. 2009. Fragile x syndrome and autism: from disease model to therapeutic targets. J Neurodev Disord 1:133–140.
- Ecker C, Bookheimer SY, Murphy DG. 2015. Neuroimaging in autism spectrum disorder: brain structure and function across the lifespan. Lancet Neurol 14:1121–1134.
- Gallagher HL, Happé F, Brunswick N, et al. 2000. Reading the mind in cartoons and stories: an fMRI study of "theory of mind" in verbal and nonverbal tasks. Neuropsy-
- chologia 38:11–21. Gaugler T, Klei L, Sanders SJ, et al. 2014. Most genetic risk for autism resides with common variation. Nat Genet 46:881–885.
- Grove J, Ripke S, Als TD, et al. 2019. Identification of common genetic risk variants for autism spectrum disorder. Nat Gen 51:431–444.
- Halladay AK, Bishop S, Constantino JN, et al. 2015. Sex and gender differences in autism spectrum disorder: summarizing evidence gaps and identifying emerging areas of
- priority. Mol Autism 6:36. Happe F, Ehlers S, Fletcher P, et al. 1996. "Theory of mind" in the brain. Evidence from a PET scan study of Asperger syndrome. Neuroreport 8:197–201.
- Hill E. 2004. Executive dysfunction in autism. Trends Cogn Sci 8:26–32. Iossifov I, O'Roak BJ, Sanders SJ, et al. 2014. The contribution
- of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder. Nature 515:216–221.
- Jacquemont ML, Sanlaville D, Redon R, et al. 2006. Arraybased comparative genomic hybridisation identifies high frequency of cryptic chromosomal rearrangements in
- patients with syndromic autism spectrum disorders. J Med Genet 43:843–849. Jamain S, Quach H, Betancur C, et al. 2003. Mutations of the X-linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 are associated with autism. Nat Genet 34:27–29.

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1542

Jin P, Alisch RS, Warren ST. 2004. RNA and microRNA in

fragile X syndrome. Nat Cell Biol 6:1048–1053.

Kana RK, Keller TA, Cherkassky VL, Minshew NJ, Just MA.

2009. Atypical frontal-posterior synchronization of theory of mind regions in autism during mental state attribution.
2. Soc Neurosci 4:135–152. Kim YS, Leventhal BL. 2015. Genetic epidemiology and insights into interactive genetic and environmental effects in autism spectrum disorders. Biol Psychiatry 77:
3. 66–74. Klei L, Sanders SJ, Murtha MT, et al. 2012. Common genetic variants, acting additively, are a major source of risk for autism. Mol Autism 3:9.
4. Koldewyn K, Yendiki A, Weigelt S, et al. 2014. Differences in the right inferior longitudinal fasciculus but no general disruption of white matter tracts in children with autism
5. spectrum disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:1981–1986. Kovács ÁM, Téglás E, Endress AD. 2010. The social sense: susceptibility to others' beliefs in human infants and adults. Science 330:1830–1834.
6. Kumar RA, Marshall CR, Badner JA, et al. 2009. Association and mutation analyses of 16p11.2 autism candidate genes. PLoS One 4:e4582.
7. Laumonnier F, Bonnet-Brilhault F, Gomot M, et al. 2004. X-linked mental retardation and autism are associated with a mutation in the NLGN4 gene, a member of the
8. neuroligin family. Am J Hum Genet 74:552–557. Lombardi LM, Baker SA, Zoghbi HY. 2015. MECP2 disorders: from the clinic to mice and back. J Clin Invest 125:2914–2923.
9. Marshall CR, Noor A, Vincent JB, et al. 2008. Structural variation of chromosomes in autism spectrum disorder. Am J Hum Genet 82:477–488.
10. Morrow EM, Yoo SY, Flavell SW, et al. 2008. Identifying autism loci and genes by tracing recent shared ancestry. Science 321:218–223.
11. Nakamoto M, Nalavadi V, Epstein MP, et al. 2007. Fragile X mental retardation protein deficiency leads to excessive mGluR5-dependent internalization of AMPA receptors.
12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:15537–15542. Neale BM, Kou Y, Liu L, et al. 2012. Patterns and rates of exonic de novo mutations in autism spectrum disorders. Nature 485:242–245.
13. Novarino G, El-Fishawy P, Kayserili H, et al. 2012. Mutations in BCKD-kinase lead to a potentially treatable form of autism with epilepsy. Science 338:394–397.
14. Ozonoff S, Iosif AM, Baguio F, et al. 2010. A prospective study of the emergence of early behavioral signs of autism. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiat 49:256–266.
15. Ozonoff S, Macari S, Young GS, Goldring S, Thompson M, Rogers SJ. 2008. Atypical object exploration at 12 months of age is associated with autism in a prospective sample.
16. Autism 12:457–472. Parikshak NN, Luo R, Zhang A, et al. 2013. Integrative functional genomic analyses implicate specific molecular pathways and circuits in autism. Cell 155:1008–1021.

18/12/20 11:51 AM

Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder

Pinto D, Delaby E, Merico D, et al. 2014. Convergence of


Sebat J, Lakshmi B, Malhotra D, et al. 2007. Strong association

genes and cellular pathways dysregulated in autism spec-

trum disorders. Am J Hum Genet 94:677–694.

- Raznahan A, Wallace GL, Antezana L, et al. 2013. Compared to what? Early brain overgrowth in autism and the perils of population norms. Biol Psychiatry 74:563–575.
- Samson D, Apperly IA, Chiavarino C, Humphreys GW. 2004. Left temporoparietal junction is necessary for representing someone else's belief. Nat Neurosci 7:499–500.
- Sanders SJ, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Hus V, et al. 2011. Multiple recurrent de novo CNVs, including duplications of the 7q11.23 Williams syndrome region, are strongly associ-
- ated with autism. Neuron 70:863–885. Sanders SJ, He X, Willsey AJ, et al. 2015. Insights into autism spectrum disorder genomic architecture and biology from 71 risk loci. Neuron 87:1215–1233.
- Sanders SJ, Murtha MT, Gupta AR, et al. 2012. De novo mutations revealed by whole exome sequencing are strongly associated with autism. Nature 485:237–241.
- Satterstrom FK, Kosmicki JA, Wang J, Breen MS, et al. 2020. Large-scale exome sequencing study implicates both developmental and functional changes in the neurobiol-
- ogy of autism. Cell 180:568–584. Schultz RT, Grelotti DJ, Klin A, et al. 2003. The role of the fusiform face area in social cognition: implications for the pathobiology of autism. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol
- Sci 358:415–427.

Kandel-Ch62\_1523-1543.indd 1543

of de novo copy number variation with autism. Science

316:445–449.

- Senju A, Southgate V, White S, Frith U. 2009. Mindblind eyes: an absence of spontaneous theory of mind in Asperger syndrome. Science 325:883–885.
- State MW, Sestan N. 2012. Neuroscience. The emerging biology of autism spectrum disorders. Science 337:1301–1303. Strauss KA, Puffenberger EG, Huentelman MJ, et al. 2006.
- Recessive symptomatic focal epilepsy and mutant contactin-associated protein-like 2. N Engl J Med 354:1370–1377.
- Sztainberg Y, Chen HM, Swann JW, et al. 2015. Reversal of phenotypes in MECP2 duplication mice using genetic rescue or antisense oligonucleotides. Nature 528:123–126.
- Sztainberg Y, Zoghbi HY. 2016. Lessons learned from studying syndromic autism spectrum disorders. Nat Neurosci 19:1408–1417.
- Weiss LA, Shen Y, Korn JM, et al. 2008. Association between microdeletion and microduplication at 16p11.2 and autism. N Engl J Med 358:667–675.
- Willsey AJ, Sanders SJ, Li M, et al. 2013. Coexpression networks implicate human midfetal deep cortical projection neurons in the pathogenesis of autism. Cell 155:997–1007.
- Yang DY, Beam D, Pelphrey KA, Abdullahi S, Jou RJ. 2016. Cortical morphological markers in children with autism: a structural magnetic resonance imaging study of thick-
- ness, area, volume, and gyrification. Mol Autism 7:11.

18/12/20 11:51 AM


Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative

## Diseases of the Nervous System

Huntington Disease Involves Degeneration of the Striatum

Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy Is Caused by Androgen

Receptor Dysfunction

## Hereditary Spinocerebellar Ataxias Share Similar Symptoms

but Have Distinct Etiologies Parkinson Disease Is a Common Degenerative Disorder of

the Elderly Selective Neuronal Loss Occurs After Damage to

Ubiquitously Expressed Genes Animal Models Are Productive Tools for Studying

Neurodegenerative Diseases Mouse Models Reproduce Many Features of

Neurodegenerative Diseases Invertebrate Models Manifest Progressive

Neurodegeneration The Pathogenesis of Neurodegenerative Diseases Follows

Several Pathways Protein Misfolding and Degradation Contribute to

## Parkinson Disease Protein Misfolding Triggers Pathological Alterations in

Gene Expression Mitochondrial Dysfunction Exacerbates

Neurodegenerative Disease Apoptosis and Caspases Modify the Severity of

Neurodegeneration Understanding the Molecular Dynamics of

Neurodegenerative Diseases Suggests Approaches to Therapeutic Intervention

Highlights

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1544

he major degenerative diseases of the nerv

-

ous system—Alzheimer, Parkinson, and the tri-

plet repeat diseases (Huntington disease and the

T

spinocerebellar ataxias)—afflict more than six million people in the United States and more than 25 million throughout the world. Although this is a relatively small percentage of the population, these diseases bring a disproportionate amount of suffering and economic hardship, not only to their victims but also to the families and friends of the afflicted. Most of these disorders strike in mid-life or later. Aging itself may contribute to susceptibility. The first symptoms to appear often involve loss of fine motor

control. Huntington disease can first manifest itself in cognitive deficits, and this is certainly the case for Alzheimer disease. Nevertheless, the end result is the same: A period of slow deterioration, usually 10 to 20 years, robs afflicted patients of their abilities and eventually their lives. The late-onset neurodegenerative diseases can be divided into two categories: inherited and sporadic (ie, of unknown etiology). Alzheimer and Parkinson dis-

eases are predominantly sporadic; nevertheless, inherited forms, which afflict only a small number of patients, have provided some insight into the pathophysiology of these diseases. Huntington disease, the spinocerebellar ataxias, dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, and spinobulbar muscular atrophy are inherited, the result of polyglutamine or CAG triplet repeat diseases. The triplet repeat diseases are notable for being caused by a "dynamic" mutation: The disease proteins contain a CAG repeat tract that codes for glutamine

18/12/20 11:52 AM

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

and can undergo expansion during DNA replication.

Unfortunately, the longer the CAG tract, the more

likely it is to further expand, which accounts for the


leads to thinning of the cortex. In addition to this cen-

tral nervous system pathology, patients can suffer from

immune system and metabolic disturbances, testicu-

-lar atrophy, cardiac failure, osteoporosis, and skeletal muscle wasting. Cases of juvenile Huntington disease are more severe, and the pathology progresses more rapidly and broadly; for example, degeneration of cerebellar Purkinje cells can occur. Huntington disease is an autosomal dominant disorder and one of the first human diseases whose gene was mapped using polymorphic DNA markers. It is caused

by expansion of a translated CAG repeat that encodes a glutamine tract in the huntingtin protein. Normal or wild-type alleles have 6 to 34 repeats, whereas diseasecausing alleles typically have 36 or more repeats that are quite unstable when transmitted from one generation to the next, especially through paternal germ cells. Disease severity, age of onset, and speed of progression correlate with repeat length; individuals with 36 to 39 repeats have later onset and milder disease, while those with more than 40 repeats will have earlier onset and a more severe course. Those carrying more than 75 repeats will develop the disease as juveniles. The expanded glutamine tract causes a gain of function in huntingtin, a 348-kDa protein that is well conserved in nature from invertebrates to mammals.

striking phenomenon of anticipation: Younger generations within a family have longer repeats and develop more severe symptoms at an earlier age than their parents. Identification of the molecular basis of these dis orders has facilitated diagnosis and provides hope for eventual treatment. Huntington Disease Involves Degeneration

of the Striatum

## Huntington disease usually strikes in early or middle adulthood and affects 5 to 10 people per 100,000.

Symptoms include loss of motor control, cognitive

impairment, and affective disturbance. Motor problems most commonly manifest first as chorea (involuntary, jerky movement that involves the small joints at first but then gradually affects the legs and trunk, making walking difficult). Fast, fluid movements are replaced by rigidity and bradykinesia (unusually slow movements). Cognitive impairment—especially difficulty in planning and executing complex functions—may be detected by formal neuropsychological testing even

prior to motor dysfunction. Affected individuals may also have disordered sleep and affective disturbances such as depression, irritability, and social withdrawal. About 10% of patients experience hypomania (increased energy), and a smaller percentage experience frank psychosis. In adult patients, the disease progresses inexorably to death some 17 to 20 years after onset. Juvenileonset patients suffer a more rapid course and typically

develop bradykinesia, dystonia (spasms of the neck, shoulders, and trunk), rigidity (resistance to the passive motion of a limb), seizures, and severe dementia within only a few years. The pathological hallmark of Huntington disease is degeneration of the striatum, which can show up in neuroimaging as much as a decade prior to the onset

of symptoms. The caudate nucleus is more affected than the putamen. Loss of the medium spiny neurons, a class of inhibitory interneurons in the striatum, reduces inhibition of neurons in the external pallidum (Chapter 38). The resulting excessive activity of the pallidal neurons inhibits the subthalamic nucleus, which could account for the choreiform movements. As the disease progresses and striatal neurons projecting to the internal pallidum degenerate, rigidity replaces chorea. Disruption of the corticostriatal projections

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1545

It is expressed throughout the brain as a soluble cytoplasmic protein, with a minor fraction present in cell nuclei. It is particularly abundant in somatodendritic regions and axons and has been found to associate with microtubules. Although its precise functions are not fully understood, huntingtin is essential for normal embryonic development. Based on a wide array of protein interactors that function in metabolism, protein turnover, cargo trafficking, and gene expression, it has been postulated that huntingtin functions as a molecular scaffold. Its large size, stability, and ability to switch between multiple conformations suggest it brings together multiple proteins into macromolecular complexes. Huntingtin has multiple protein domains, the best studied of which is the N-terminal region, which contains the polyglutamine expansion and a nuclear localization

signal. The N-terminal region consists of an amphipathic α-helix, which creates a structure critical for the protein's retention in the endoplasmic reticulum. The N-terminus undergoes extensive posttranslational modification by acetylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and sumoylation, all of which affect huntingtin clearance and subcellular localization. Interestingly, the polyglutamine repeats in exon 1 are followed by a proline-rich domain, which, unlike the other exons, has been poorly conserved during evolution.

18/12/20 11:52 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

The remaining 66 exons outside the N-terminus,

which account for about 98% of the protein, are far less

well characterized. Several HEAT repeats are impor-

tant for protein–protein interactions. These interactions allow the huntingtin protein to adopt a large number of three-dimensional conformations (up to 100 in vitro). Furthermore, the HTT gene produces two different mRNA transcripts, a short and long form. The long form contains an additional 3 ′ untranslated region and is enriched in the brain. Rare alternative splicing produces isoforms that skip exons 10, 12, 29, and 46 or include exon 41b or a fragment of intron 28, but their significance has not been determined. The diversity of these isoforms might be important during development and could expand the variety of protein interactions available to huntingtin. Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy Is Caused by

Androgen Receptor Dysfunction

## Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA, also known as Kennedy disease) is the only X-linked disorder among

the neurodegenerative diseases discussed in this

chapter. It is caused by expansion of a translated CAG repeat in the androgen receptor protein, a member of the steroid hormone receptor family. Only males manifest symptoms: The mutant androgen receptor is toxic only when localized to the nucleus, and this localization is dependent on the hormone androgen. Proximal muscle weakness is usually the presenting symptom; eventually, the distal and facial muscles weaken as well. Muscle wasting is prominent, second-

ary to degeneration of motor neurons. Loss of androgen function typically leads to gynecomastia (growth of breast tissue in men), late hypogonadism, and sterility. Because individuals who lose androgen receptor function from other causes do not develop motor neuron degeneration, it seems that the glutamine expansion in SBMA causes both a partial loss of function that accounts for the secondary sexual characteristics and a partial gain of function that damages neurons and produces the neurological dysfunction. Hereditary Spinocerebellar Ataxias Share

Similar Symptoms but Have

Distinct Etiologies

## The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) and dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) are characterized

by dysfunction of the cerebellum, spinal tracts, and

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1546

various brain stem nuclei. The basal ganglia, cerebral

cortex, and peripheral nervous system can also be

affected (Table 63–1).

Two clinical features common to all the SCAs, ataxia and dysarthria, are signs of cerebellar dysfunction. These typically appear in mid-adulthood and gradu-

ally worsen, eventually making walking impossible and speech incomprehensible. Brain stem dysfunction in advanced disease causes difficulties in keeping the airway clear; patients often die of aspiration pneumonia. Some SCAs are associated with additional symptoms such as chorea, retinopathy, or dementia, but these are too variable to support a differential diagnosis. Even individuals within the same family can present quite different clinical pictures. Thus, although the SCAs are single-gene Mendelian disorders, individual genetic makeup and environmental influences affect the clinical-pathological picture. For example, Machado-Joseph disease and SCA type 3 (SCA3) had been regarded clinically as distinct diseases before it was discovered that they are caused

-

by mutations in the same gene. The clinical confusion arose by historical accident. The most prominent features of the families of Azorean descent who were first studied were bulging eyes, faciolingual fasciculations, Parkinsonism, and dystonia; this syndrome was named Machado-Joseph disease. Subsequently, a group of European geneticists studied patients who had symptoms more reminiscent of SCA1—hypermetric saccades and brisk reflexes in addition to the char acteristic ataxia and dysarthria. This constellation of symptoms was therefore called SCA3. It took several years before it became clear that the genetic locus of the two diseases was the same, but still both names (Machado-Joseph disease and SCA3) are used. We now know that the differences observed in the original two groups of patients are at least partially attributable to differences in length of the CAG repeats. Nonetheless, differences in the activity of other proteins caused by genetic variations are probably also at play. The age of onset within each type of ataxia depends on the number of CAG repeats in the gene (Figure 63–1), although the toxicity of different repeat lengths

depends on the protein context. For example, the CAG expansion in SCA6 is the shortest of all the SCAs: Normal alleles have fewer than 18 repeats, and pathological repeats have only 21 to 33 repeats. Yet, tracts of the very same length are completely nonpathogenic in other SCAs. In fact, the gene responsible for SCA7 normally tolerates a few dozen CAG repeats and, in the disease state, can undergo expansion to hundreds of CAGs, the largest expansions seen in any SCA.

18/12/20 11:52 AM

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Table 63–1 Pattern of Inheritance and Main Clinical Features of Neurodegenerative Diseases Caused by Unstable CAG

Trinucleotide Repeats

Disease Inheritance Typical presenting features Principal regions affected

SBMA

X-linked recessive Muscle cramps, weakness,

| gynecomastia  horn cells  Huntington  AD  Cognitive impairment, chorea,  depression, irritability  Striatum, cortex  Huntington-like 2  AD  Cognitive impairment, chorea,  depression, irritability  Striatum, cortex  SCA1  AD  Hypermetric saccades, ataxia,  dysarthria, balance, nystagmus  Purkinje cells, brain stem  SCA2  AD  Ataxia, hyporeflexia, slow saccades  Purkinje cells, granule cells,  inferior olive  SCA3  AD  Ataxia, gaze-evoked nystagmus,  bulging eyes, dystonia, spasticity  Pontine neurons, substantia nigra,  anterior horn cells  SCA6  AD  Ataxia, late onset (&gt;50 years of age)  Purkinje cells, granule cells  SCA7  AD  Ataxia, visual loss due to retinal  degeneration, hearing loss  Purkinje cells, retina (cone-rod  degeneration)  SCA8  AD  Scanning dysarthria, ataxia  Purkinje cells  SCA10  AD  Ataxia and seizures  Purkinje cells  SCA12  AD  Early arm tremor, hyperreflexia,  ataxia  Purkinje cells, cortical and cerebellar  atrophy  SCA17  AD  Dysphagia, intellectual deterioration,  ataxia, absence seizures  Purkinje cells, granule layer, upper  motor neurons  DRPLA  AD  Dementia, ataxia, choreoathetosis  Dentate nucleus, red nucleus, globus  pallidus, subthalamic nucleus,  cerebellar cortex, cortex  AD, autosomal dominant; DRPLA, dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy; SBMA, spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia.   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Besides tolerating different CAG repeat lengths,

the gene products of mutated genes in polyglutamine

diseases vary widely in function:

· The gene product in SCA1, ataxin-1 (ATXN1), is predominantly a nuclear protein that forms a complex

with the transcriptional repressor Capicua (CIC).

- The expanded glutamine tract alters ATXN1's interaction with CIC in the cerebellum, which helps explain this region's vulnerability to SCA1 pathophysiology. · SCA2 is caused by a CAG trinucleotide expansion in ATXN2. Genetic ablation of Atxn2 increases global transcript abundance, indicating that it may
- work as an RNA-binding protein. More recent studies revealed that it interacts with TDP43, a protein involved in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1547

Lower motor neurons and anterior

(ALS10), and mutations in ATXN2 may contribute

to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Impaired protein clearance is a theme among the

·

- SCAs, insofar as elevated levels of the diseasecausing protein seem to drive pathogenesis. In
- the case of SCA3, the relationship is more direct in that ataxin-3 (ATXN3) is a deubiquitinating enzyme, and the expanded version cannot remove ubiquitin from proteins slated for clearance. More recently, ATXN3 has been linked to DNA damage repair. · The affected gene product in SCA6, CACNA1A, is the α 1A -subunit of the voltage-gated Ca 2+ chan -nel; interestingly, loss-of-function mutations in the
- gene (not gain of function caused by CAG repeats) have been reported in patients with episodic ataxia and familial hemiplegic migraine.

18/12/20 11:52 AM





SCA6

SCA2

SCA7

<!-- image -->

SCA1

SCA3 Parkinson Disease Is a Common

Degenerative Disorder of the Elderly

## Parkinson disease, one of the more common neuro -degenerative disorders, affects approximately 3% of the

population older than age 65 years. Patients with

The longer the CAG tract, the earlier is the onset for a given

disease. Specific repeat lengths, however, have different results depending on the host protein. For example, a 52-repeat of CAG causes juvenile onset of symptoms in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), adult onset in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1), and no disease in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3). · In SCA17, the affected gene product is the TATA box-

binding protein, an essential transcription factor.

·

100 120 Parkinson disease suffer from a resting tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, and impairment in their ability to initiate and sustain movements. Affected individuals walk with a distinctive shuffling gait, and their balance is often precarious. Spontaneous facial movements are greatly diminished, creating a mask-like, expressionless appearance. The pathological hallmarks of Parkinson disease are the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons, mainly in the substantia nigra pars compacta (Chapter 38), and the accumulation of proteinaceous aggregates termed Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites throughout the brain. Although most cases of Parkinson disease are sporadic, studies of rare familial cases, which can be either autosomal dominant or recessive, have provided

Atrophin-1, the disease-causing protein in DRPLA,

- is thought to be a corepressor based on functional studies of its probable ortholog in Drosophila.
- Despite these differences, some pathogenetic mechanisms may be common to the polyglutamine

diseases, as discussed later in this chapter.

CAG repeats in coding regions are not the only dynamic mutations occurring in the SCAs (Table 63–2). SCA8 involves expansion of both a CAG tract and its

complementary CTG repeat on the opposite strand in the 3 ′ untranslated region of a transcribed RNA with no open reading frame. The mutation responsible for SCA12 is a CAG repeat, but it occurs in a noncoding region 5 ′ upstream of a brain-specific regulatory subunit of the protein phosphatase 2A. SCA10 is caused by massive expansion of a pentanucleotide (ATTCT) repeat in the intron of a novel gene. So far, a total of 33 SCAs have been identified. For the SCAs whose underlying pathogenesis is better understood, the most promising therapeutic approach insight into the pathophysiology of this disorder and revealed novel risk factors for disease. To date, several genetic loci have been mapped (designated PARK1– PARK22), and the genes for all but four of these loci (PARK3 , PARK10 , PARK12, and PARK16) have been identified (Table 63–3). Of these mapped loci, the most studied and characterized are PARK1/4 , P PARK2 , P and PARK7. Here, we focus on how the genetic basis of some forms of Parkinson disease provides insight into sporadic Parkinson disease. Parkinson disease type 1/4 (4q2-22) is the locus for the dominantly inherited Parkinson disease caused by mutations in the gene SNCA encoding for α-synuclein.

seems to be to reduce the levels of the disease-driving protein. In the SCA7 mouse model, reducing the amount of both mutant and wild-type ATXN7 by RNA interference greatly improves the behavioral and pathological signs of disease. Likewise, in both Drosophila and mouse models of SCA1, genetic or pharmacological downregulation of several components of the

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1548

PARK6

,

(As with Machado-Joseph disease and SCA3, Park1 and Park4 were initially thought to be two distinct variants.) Variants in the SNCA locus have been associated with increased risk of sporadic Parkinson disease, and several mutations in SNCA alter the conformation of the membrane-bound portion of the α-synuclein protein and cause it to aggregate. Duplications and triplications of SNCA have also been identified as causes of autosomal dominant Parkinson disease, indicating that elevated levels of even wild-type α-synuclein can cause disease. Patients with SNCA duplication have a disease course that resembles sporadic cases, but patients with triplication manifest an earlier-onset, more rapidly progressing disease with atypical features such as dementia and hallucinations.

18/12/20 11:52 AM

Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System RAS-MAPK-MSK1 pathway decreases ATXN1 levels and suppresses neurodegeneration.

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Table 63–2 Hereditary Ataxias Caused by Expansion of Unstable CAG Trinucleotide Repeats

Disease Gene Locus Protein Mutation


Repeat lengths

Normal Disease

39–121

36–63

55–84

21–33

37–306

110–250

500–4,500

66–78

47–55

49–88

60–200

| SCA1  SCA1  6p23  Ataxin-1  CAG repeat in coding region  6–44  1  SCA2  SCA2  12q24.1  Ataxin-2  CAG repeat in coding region  15–31  SCA3 (Machado-  Joseph disease)  SCA3, MJD1  14q32.1  Ataxin-3  CAG repeat in coding region  12–40  SCA6  SCA6  19p13  α  1A  subunit of  voltage-dependent  calcium channel  CAG repeat in coding region  4–18  SCA7  SCA7  3p12-13  Ataxin-7  CAG repeat in coding region  4–35  SCA8  SCA8  13q21  None  CTG repeat in the 3  ′  terminal  exon (antisense)  16–37  SCA10  SCA10  22q13ter  Ataxin-10  Pentanucleotide (ATTCT)  repeat in the intron  10–20  SCA12  SCA12  5q31-33  Protein  phosphatase 2A  CAG repeat in 5  ′  UTR  7–28  SCA17  TBP  6qter  TATA-binding  protein  CAG repeat in coding region  29–42  DRPLA  DRPLA  12q  Atrophin-1  CAG repeat in coding region  6–35  FXTAS  FMR1  Xq27.3  FMRP  CGG repeat in 5  ′  UTR  6–60  1  Alleles with 21 or more repeats are interrupted by one to three CAT units; disease alleles contain pure CAG tracts.  DRPLA, dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy; FXTA, fragile X–associated tremor ataxia; SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia.   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Patients with SNCA mutations differ from those an E3 ubiquitin ligase of the RING finger family that

with sporadic Parkinson disease in that the age of

onset is earlier (a mean of 45 years), and they exhibit transfers activated ubiquitin to lysine residues in pro- teins destined for degradation by proteasomes. Stud-

fewer tremors and more rigidity, cognitive decline, myoclonus, central hypoventilation, orthostatic hypotension, and urinary incontinence. Autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism is characterized by early-onset dystonia, brisk deep tendon reflexes, and cerebellar signs in addition to the

classic signs of Parkinson disease, all as early as 3 years of age. Mutations in PARK2 , PARK6, and PARK7— which encode parkin, PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), and protein deglycase DJ-1, respectively— have been confirmed as causes of this disease. Muta tions in PARK2 are much more frequent than mutations in PARK6 and PARK7, and more than 60 different inac tivating mutations have been identified; autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinsonism is thus caused by loss of function of the gene product rather than a gain of function. The pathology is also characterized by loss of dopaminergic neurons, but Lewy bodies are not as common as in sporadic or PARK1/4 cases. Parkin is

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1549

7— ies in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster revealed that parkin and PINK1 work together to promote healthy mitochondria. Interestingly, DJ-1, the third cause of autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism, is also involved in mitochondrial function, acting as an oxidative stress sensor. Not all genetic causes of Parkinson disease exhibit complete penetrance. Such is the case with mutations in the gene encoding the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2

--(LRRK2 , PARK8). Interestingly, LRRK2 mutations are a risk factor for sporadic Parkinson disease. Another genetic risk factor for Parkinson disease is the gene coding for glucocerebrosidase-1 (GBA1): Heterozygous carriers of GBA1 mutations are at increased risk of developing Parkinson disease later in life, whereas homozygous carriers develop a recessive disorder known as Gaucher disease. There are undoubtedly additional genetic risk factors for Parkinson disease, and efforts to identify them are ongoing.

18/12/20 11:52 AM
Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Table 63–2 Hereditary Ataxias Caused by Expansion of Unstable CAG Trinucleotide Repeats

Disease Gene Locus Protein Mutation


Repeat lengths

Normal Disease

39–121

36–63

55–84

21–33

37–306

110–250

500–4,500

66–78

47–55

49–88

60–200

| SCA1  SCA1  6p23  Ataxin-1  CAG repeat in coding region  6–44  1  SCA2  SCA2  12q24.1  Ataxin-2  CAG repeat in coding region  15–31  SCA3 (Machado-  Joseph disease)  SCA3, MJD1  14q32.1  Ataxin-3  CAG repeat in coding region  12–40  SCA6  SCA6  19p13  α  1A  subunit of  voltage-dependent  calcium channel  CAG repeat in coding region  4–18  SCA7  SCA7  3p12-13  Ataxin-7  CAG repeat in coding region  4–35  SCA8  SCA8  13q21  None  CTG repeat in the 3  ′  terminal  exon (antisense)  16–37  SCA10  SCA10  22q13ter  Ataxin-10  Pentanucleotide (ATTCT)  repeat in the intron  10–20  SCA12  SCA12  5q31-33  Protein  phosphatase 2A  CAG repeat in 5  ′  UTR  7–28  SCA17  TBP  6qter  TATA-binding  protein  CAG repeat in coding region  29–42  DRPLA  DRPLA  12q  Atrophin-1  CAG repeat in coding region  6–35  FXTAS  FMR1  Xq27.3  FMRP  CGG repeat in 5  ′  UTR  6–60  1  Alleles with 21 or more repeats are interrupted by one to three CAT units; disease alleles contain pure CAG tracts.  DRPLA, dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy; FXTA, fragile X–associated tremor ataxia; SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia.   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Patients with SNCA mutations differ from those an E3 ubiquitin ligase of the RING finger family that

with sporadic Parkinson disease in that the age of

onset is earlier (a mean of 45 years), and they exhibit transfers activated ubiquitin to lysine residues in pro- teins destined for degradation by proteasomes. Stud-

fewer tremors and more rigidity, cognitive decline, myoclonus, central hypoventilation, orthostatic hypotension, and urinary incontinence. Autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism is characterized by early-onset dystonia, brisk deep tendon reflexes, and cerebellar signs in addition to the

classic signs of Parkinson disease, all as early as 3 years of age. Mutations in PARK2 , PARK6, and PARK7— which encode parkin, PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), and protein deglycase DJ-1, respectively— have been confirmed as causes of this disease. Muta tions in PARK2 are much more frequent than mutations in PARK6 and PARK7, and more than 60 different inac tivating mutations have been identified; autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinsonism is thus caused by loss of function of the gene product rather than a gain of function. The pathology is also characterized by loss of dopaminergic neurons, but Lewy bodies are not as common as in sporadic or PARK1/4 cases. Parkin is

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1549

7— ies in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster revealed that parkin and PINK1 work together to promote healthy mitochondria. Interestingly, DJ-1, the third cause of autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism, is also involved in mitochondrial function, acting as an oxidative stress sensor. Not all genetic causes of Parkinson disease exhibit complete penetrance. Such is the case with mutations in the gene encoding the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2

--(LRRK2 , PARK8). Interestingly, LRRK2 mutations are a risk factor for sporadic Parkinson disease. Another genetic risk factor for Parkinson disease is the gene coding for glucocerebrosidase-1 (GBA1): Heterozygous carriers of GBA1 mutations are at increased risk of developing Parkinson disease later in life, whereas homozygous carriers develop a recessive disorder known as Gaucher disease. There are undoubtedly additional genetic risk factors for Parkinson disease, and efforts to identify them are ongoing.

18/12/20 11:52 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Table 63–3 Genetics and Main Clinical Features of Inherited Parkinson Disease

Disease

PARK1/4

Locus map

4q21

Inheritance pattern

AD

Gene

SNCA

Selective Neuronal Loss Occurs After Damage

to Ubiquitously Expressed Genes

## One perplexing aspect of these neurodegenerative diseases is that the altered gene products are widely and

abundantly expressed not only in the nervous system

but also in other tissues, yet the phenotypes are predominantly neurological. Moreover, the phenotypes usually reflect dysfunction in only specific groups of neurons (Figure 63–2), a phenomenon referred to as neuronal selectivity. Why are striatal neurons the most vulnerable in Huntington disease, whereas the Purkinje cells are targeted in the SCAs? Why are the dopaminergic neu-

rons in the substantia nigra pars compacta primarily affected in Parkinson disease even though α-synuclein, parkin, DJ-1, PINK1, and LRRK2 are abundant in many other neuronal (and even nonneuronal) groups?

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1550

Main features

Early onset, rigidity, and cognitive impairment

| PARK2  6q26  AR  PARKIN  Juvenile onset and dystonia  PARK3  2p13  AD  Unknown  Adult onset, dementia  PARK5  4p13  AD  UCHL1  Adult onset  PARK6  1p36.12  AR  PINK1  Early onset, dystonia  PARK7  1p36.21  AR  DJ1  Early onset, behavioral disturbance, dystonia  PARK8  PARK9  12q12  1p36.13  AD  AR  LRRK2  ATP13A2  Classic PD  Juvenile or early onset, cognitive impairment  PARK10  1p32  AD  Unknown  Classic PD  PARK11  PARK12  PARK13  PARK14  PARK15  PARK16  PARK17  PARK18  PARK19a/b  PARK20  PARK21  PARK22  2q37.1  Xq21-25  2p13.1  22q13.1  22q12.3  1q32  16q11.2  6p21.3  1p31.3  21q22.11  3q22  7p11.2  AD  X-linked  AD  AR  AR  Unknown  Unknown  Unknown  AR  AR  AD  AD  GIGYF2  Unknown  Omi/HtrA2  PLA2G6  FBXO7  Unknown  VPS35  EIF4G1  DNAJC6  SYNJ1  DNAJC13  CHCHD2  Adult onset, cognitive impairment  Unknown  Classic PD  Early onset, cognitive impairment, dystonia.  Juvenile onset or early onset  Unknown  Adult onset, cognitive impairment, dystonia  Classic PD  Juvenile or early onset, cognitive impairment  Early onset, seizures  Classic PD  Classic PD  AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; PARK, PD, Parkinson disease.   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Although definitive answers are not yet available,

some hypotheses have been advanced. One possibil-

ity was suggested by the finding that the dopaminer-

gic neurons that are vulnerable in Parkinson disease exhibit an unusual physiological characteristic: They depend on Ca 2+ channels to fire in a rhythmic pattern. This dependence on Ca 2+ influx in the neuron is thought to cause baseline mitochondrial stress, which could explain why these neurons are so vulnerable to direct insults to mitochondrial recycling, such as caused by parkin, DJ-1, and PINK1 dysfunction, as well as additional stress caused by LRRK2 dysfunction and α-synuclein accumulation. In the polyglutamine diseases, the selectivity of the cellular pathology diminishes as the length of the glutamine tract increases: The more severe the mutation,

the greater is the number of neuronal groups affected. This is especially evident in the early-onset forms

18/12/20 11:52 AM

A

diseases and Parkinson disease.

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Cerebral

cortex Huntington disease DRPLA

hyperreexia, clonus, Babinski sign)

Motor neurons SBMA, ALS

fasciculations, muscle atrophy)

dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy; SCA, spinocerebellar

B. Comparison of neuropathology of amyotrophic lateral sclero-

A. Brain regions most typically affected by adult-onset disease (see Table 63–1). (Abbreviations: DRPLA ,

<!-- image -->

characterized by extremely long repeats. Juvenile SCA1 can involve oculomotor abnormalities, for exam

-

ple, or cause dystonia, rigidity, and cognitive impair-

ment, features that overlap with Huntington disease and DRPLA; death usually occurs within 4 to 8 years of symptom onset. Juvenile SCA7 patients can suffer seizures, delusions, and auditory hallucinations, and infantile disease also produces somatic features such as short stature and congestive heart failure. Infantile SCA7 causes progressive blindness by destroying both rods and cones; interestingly, infants with SCA2 can also suffer retinal degeneration. Such observations suggest that different cell types have different thresholds of vulnerability to toxic proteins with expanded

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1551

sis (ALS) and spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA).

glutamine tracts. Retinal cells, for example, seem more

resistant to polyglutamine toxicity than cerebellar neu-

rons, but more vulnerable than cardiac myocytes. Once

the number of glutamines in the tract expands beyond a certain length—which varies from one protein to the next—no cell is safe. Studies using mouse models suggest that protein misfolding is responsible for polyglutamine disorders. The longer the glutamine tract, the more severe the mis-

folding, and the more resistance there is to clearance; thus, the slow accumulation of higher-than-normal protein levels is a feature common to neurodegenerative diseases. As the tracts become very long, even cells with lower concentrations of disordered gene product

18/12/20 11:52 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

become vulnerable. Indeed, studies of animal mod

-

els show that even a doubling in concentration can be

the difference between phenotypic manifestation and

apparent normality. It is therefore conceivable that the neurons affected in each disease have more dysfunctional protein than do the less vulnerable neurons. Although not detectable by current immunolabeling techniques, this incremental increase would nevertheless be sufficient to interfere with cellular function if the neuron was exposed to the toxic protein over decades. Other major contributors to selective vulnerability might be variations in the levels of proteins that interact with or help dispose of the mutant proteins.

Variations in the genes encoding such proteins could contribute to the clinical variability that is so prominent among ataxia families. Why are neurons affected before other cells? As the organism ages, slight insults that have small detrimental effects could be exacerbated by the extra

challenge the toxic protein presents to the proteinfolding machinery. Because neurons are postmitotic, they might be especially sensitive to perturbations in the balance of intracellular factors. If the organism could survive the neurological assault long enough, other tissues might also eventually show signs of distress. Animal Models Are Productive Tools for

Studying Neurodegenerative Diseases

## Animal models have proven extremely valuable for probing the pathogenesis of various neurodegenera-

tive diseases and investigating therapies. The mouse

has been the favored animal for modeling neurological disorders, but the Drosophila fly and the worm Caenorhabditis elegans have also proven useful in delineating genetic pathways. Mouse Models Reproduce Many Features of Neurodegenerative Diseases

## With the exception of the autosomal recessive juvenile forms of Parkinson disease, the neurodegenerative dis-

eases discussed here primarily reflect gain-of-function

mutations. Thus, most of the genetically engineered mice that model these diseases are created using one of two techniques. In the transgenic approach, an allele harboring the mutant gene is overexpressed, whereas in the knock-in approach, a human mutation, such as an expanded CAG tract, is inserted into an endogenous mouse locus to promote expression of the gene

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1552

product at the correct time in development and in the

right cells.

In some transgenic models, such as those gener-

ated for SCA types 1, 2, 3, and 7 and DRPLA, a fulllength cDNA with either wild type or expanded alleles

is overexpressed either in a particular class of neurons or in a larger population of cells (Figure 63–3). In other transgenic models of SCA3 and in models of SBMA, truncated versions of the coding regions are expressed. Both full-length and truncated huntingtin have been used in transgenic models. Knock-in mice have been generated for Huntington disease, SBMA, and SCA types 1 and 7. These models confirm that sequences other than the expanded

glutamine tract can produce toxic protein. Moreover, the same expansion in two different host proteins can affect cells differently. For example, in humans, 33 repeats cause SCA2, whereas 44 to 52 CAG repeats may or may not develop SCA3 (Figure 63–1 and Table 63–2). In mouse models, however, the relationship of the length of the tract to the rest of the protein is a good predictor of toxicity: Severe, widespread, nonselective neuronal dysfunction occurs in transgenic mice bearing a truncated protein with a relatively large glutamine tract. In contrast, mice that express full-length proteins containing the same CAG repeat length develop a milder neurological syndrome that progresses more slowly. Weakly expressing promoters also tend to produce more selective neuronal dysfunction. In some cases, expression of the full-length protein with even a moderately large expansion does not cause neurological dysfunction, but a truncated version bearing a similar repeat size does produce the disease phenotype. In sum, a glutamine tract of a certain length is more toxic when expressed in isolation or flanked by short peptide sequences, that is, when it occupies a larger proportion of the protein. In SCA1 knock-in mice with 78 glutamine repeats, neurological dysfunction is barely detectable; only when the repeat length is expanded to approximately

154 glutamines does a neurological phenotype become apparent. Longer repeats are necessary to see a phenotype during the short life span of a mouse because polyglutamine toxicity takes time to exert its effects. In transgenic mice, however, massive overproduction of the mutant protein compensates for a moderate repeat length and brevity of exposure. Indeed, in mice, even overproduction of wild type ataxin-1 results in mild neurological dysfunction, and overexpression of wild type human α-synuclein is enough to cause parkinsonian symptoms. Analysis of brain tissue from humans and various experimental mice reveals that misfolded proteins

18/12/20 11:52 AM

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Wild type Purkinje cell layer

<!-- image -->

Figure 63–3 Progressive Purkinje cell pathology in spi-

nocerebellar ataxia type 1 transgenic mice. Cerebellar

Spinocerebellar ataxia 1

<!-- image -->

sections from a wild type mouse and mice expressing a

spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) transgene with 82 glutamines in Purkinje cells at 12 and 22 weeks of age. Calbindin tend to accumulate in various neurons, often form-

ing visible aggregates (Figure 63–4). Lewy bodies

and abnormal accumulation of α-synuclein develop

in mouse models of Parkinson disease, just as in humans. Although protein accumulation is common to all these neurodegenerative disorders, the location of the accumulated protein in the cell varies, and location within the cell is a factor in the protein's pathogenicity. For example, mutant ataxin-1 that accumulates in the cytoplasm instead of the nucleus (because its nuclear localization signal is disabled) exerts no detectable toxic effects. The fact that mutant proteins accumulate both in mouse models that do not overproduce the proteins and in human patients who carry a single mutant allele

suggests that neurons have difficulty clearing the proteins. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that ubiquitin and proteasome components, the machinery of protein degradation, are found with protein aggregates in both human and mouse tissues. Invertebrate Models Manifest Progressive Neurodegeneration

## Several invertebrate models have been used to study polyglutamine proteins, α-synuclein, parkin, and PINK1. The similarities in the pathogenic effects of these pro-

teins across species are remarkable.

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1553

200 µm

immunofluorescence staining marks the Purkinje cells and

their extensive dendritic arbors. In SCA1, there is progressive

loss of dendrites, thinning of the molecular layer, and Purkinje

cell displacement (arrowheads). (Images reproduced, with permission, from H.T. Orr.) Flies with high levels of human α-synuclein develop

progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons

and have α-synuclein–immunoreactive cytoplasmic

aggregates reminiscent of Lewy bodies. As in the mouse model, high levels of α-synuclein in flies carrying either the wild-type or mutant allele induce this phenotype. Additionally, flies with PINK1 or parkin mutations have dopaminergic neuron defects and motor abnormalities. Overexpression of wild type or mutant ataxin-1 in flies induces progressive neuronal degeneration that correlates with protein levels, but of course is more severe for flies with the mutant protein. Polyglutamine toxicity has also been evaluated in the nematode C. elegans by expressing an amino terminal fragment of huntingtin containing glutamine

tracts of different lengths. Neuronal dysfunction and cell death occur in worms expressing expanded tracts embedded within a truncated protein. The Pathogenesis of Neurodegenerative

Diseases Follows Several Pathways

## Protein Misfolding and Degradation Contribute to Parkinson Disease

## The gradual accumulation of neurodegenerative disease proteins along with chaperones and components

18/12/20 11:52 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A

Control Huntington disease Parkinson disease Spinocerebellar ataxia 6

are synuclein, ubiquitin, and abnormally phosphorylated

neurofilaments that form a nonmembrane-bounded

compacted skein in the cell body. Extracellular

Control

<!-- image -->

A. Comparison of a normal spiny neuron from the caudate

nucleus and a spiny neuron affected by Huntington disease. Note the marked recurving of terminal dendritic branches in

the diseased neuron. (Image of Huntington neuron reproduced, with permission, from Marian Di Figlia and J.-P. Vonsattel.) B. A pigmented dopaminergic neuron in the substantia nigra with a classic cytoplasmic inclusion (Lewy body). The circular cytoplasmic inclusion is surrounded by a clear halo.

Recent electron-microscopic and biochemical evidence indicates that the primary components of Lewy bodies

of the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation pathway

suggests that expansion of the glutamine tract alters

the folding state of the native protein, which in turn

recruits the activity of the protein-folding and degradation machinery. When that machinery cannot process the protein molecules, they accumulate, eventually forming aggregates. Evidence in support of this idea first came from observations in cell culture that over production of chaperones reduces protein aggregation and mitigates the toxicity of expanded glutamine tracts in proteins. In contrast, blocking the proteasome inhibits protein degradation and thus enhances aggregation and toxicity. Genetic studies in flies and mice provide even more compelling evidence. Overproduction of at least one chaperone, such as Hsp70, Hsp40, or tetratricopeptide protein 2, suppresses polyglutamine toxicity

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1554

Lewy bodies occur following neuronal cell death and disintegration. C. A neuron with a typical nuclear inclusion, almost as large as the nucleolus, and another Purkinje cell with a sizable vacuole and axonal swelling known as a torpedo.

- D. Because spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 results from a repeat expansion in CACNA1A, which encodes a calcium channel, CACNA1A labeling occurs diffusely throughout the cytoplasm

rather than in the nucleus.

in Drosophila and reduces degeneration in mouse mod-

els of Parkinson disease and several types of ataxia.

Conversely, loss of chaperone function worsens the

neurodegenerative phenotypes (Figure 63–5). The importance of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and protein degradation in the SCAs is further supported by genetic modification in animal models.

-In a Drosophila model of SCA1, haploinsufficiency for ubiquitin, ubiquitin carrier enzymes, or a ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase worsens neurodegeneration. It appears that inclusions are part of the cell's attempt to sequester the mutant protein and thereby limit its toxic effects. Cells that are unable to form aggregates suffer the worst damage from polyglutamine toxicity. Indeed, the knock-in mouse models of SCA types 1 and 7 show conclusively that cells that

18/12/20 11:52 AM

B

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System



<!-- image -->

duced, with permission, from J. Botas.)

A. A scanning electron micrograph depicts the eye of a fly with normal ommatidia. B. Ommatidia of a transgenic fly bearing a protein with

expanded glutamine repeats.

form aggregates survive longer; cerebellar Purkinje

cells, the prime targets in this disease, are the last to

form nuclear aggregates.

In Huntington disease, the expanded huntingtin protein is readily cleaved by proteases, but the fragments are toxic to the cell, interfering with transcrip-

tion and dysregulating the activity of dynamin-1. Expanded huntingtin activates the autophagy pathway via repression of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase, but the resulting autophagosomes are defective and cannot help the neurons degrade aggregated proteins. Finally, the expanded huntingtin protein forms aggregates. Some studies suggest these aggregates are harmful to the cell, while other studies have shown them to be protective because they reduce the circulating level of the soluble toxic protein. Their role in pathology might depend on the disease stage and which interacting proteins co-accumulate in the aggregates. Studies of Parkinson disease further underscore the importance of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and reveal additional parallels with the polyglutamine

diseases. First, studies focused on α-synuclein have shown that ubiquitinated forms of the protein accumulate in Lewy bodies and that ubiquitination regulates α-synuclein stability. Second, recent studies have identified NEDD4 as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets α-synuclein, and USP9X as a de-ubiquitinating enzyme that removes the modification. Other studies have identified parkin as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1555

100 µm

C. Owing to the mitigating effect of over-producing a heat

shock protein on the polyglutamine-induced phenotype, the

ommatidia appear almost normal.

- D. Absence of another heat shock protein aggravates the polyglutamine-induced phenotype.

targets many different mitochondrial proteins and is

important for mitochondrial quality control.

How do misfolded α-synuclein or expanded glu-

tamine tracts disrupt neuronal function? A protein that resists degradation might linger too long in the cell,

performing its normal function longer than it should; the altered conformation might also cause it to favor certain protein interactions over others. This is what happens with glutamine-expanded ataxin-1: Part of the gain of toxic function involves prolonged binding with Capicua and subsequent alterations in its transcriptional activity. Protein Misfolding Triggers Pathological Alterations in Gene Expression

## One of the key consequences of misfolding as a result of expanded glutamine tracts is alteration in gene expres-

sion. This was first suspected when it was realized

that most of the mutant proteins accumulate in the cell nucleus and that they interact with or affect the function of key transcriptional regulators. For example, huntingtin interacts with the transcription factors CREB-binding protein, NeuroD, specificity protein-1, nuclear factor-κB, and tumor suppressor protein 53 (p53), among others. Disruption of these interactions secondary to the polyglutamine expansion leads to myriad transcriptional changes seen in the disease state. Alterations in gene expression are among the earliest events in pathogenesis, occurring within days of

18/12/20 11:52 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

expression of the mutant transgene in mouse models

of SCA1 and Huntington disease. Many of the genes

whose expression is altered are involved in Ca home

-

ostasis, apoptosis, cell-cycle control, DNA repair, synaptic transmission, and transduction of sensory events into neural signals. In fly models of SCA1, several modifiers of the neurodegenerative phenotype are transcriptional cofactors. Overproduction of polyglutamine proteins also can reduce levels of histone acetylation in cells, an effect that can be reversed by overproduction of CREB-binding protein. Finally, ataxin-1 is in a native complex with the transcriptional repressor Capicua; thus, some of the gain-of-function effects involve a gain of enhanced Capicua-mediated repression. Mitochondrial Dysfunction Exacerbates Neurodegenerative Disease

## Both morphological and functional studies provide evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction in polyglu-

tamine disorders and Parkinson disease. Lymphoblast

mitochondria from patients with Huntington disease as well as brain mitochondria from a transgenic mouse model for Huntington disease have a lower membrane potential and depolarize at lower Ca 2+ loads than do control mitochondria. Several proteins implicated in Parkinson disease affect mitochondrial function and integrity. For example, studies in Drosophila showed that the loss of PINK1

leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, dopaminergic neuron impairment, and motor abnormalities that can be rescued by parkin. These studies led to the finding that PINK1 and parkin regulate mitochondrial turnover in the cell in a process termed mitophagy. Thus, given the functions and interactions of these proteins, mitochondrial dysfunction is likely to be a key contributor to the Parkinson disease phenotype. Apoptosis and Caspases Modify the Severity of Neurodegeneration

## Although studies of most neurodegenerative diseases demonstrate that symptoms appear long before detectable cell death, loss of neurons is a hallmark of the end

in vitro. This raises the possibility that caspase liberates

the fragments of these proteins with expanded glu-

tamine tracts. As noted above, such fragments are even

more damaging than the full-length protein. Intranuclear huntingtin increases production of caspase-1 in cells; this could lead to apoptosis and caspase-3 activation. Hip-1, a protein that inter-

acts with huntingtin, forms a complex that activates caspase-8. This process might be enhanced by the glutamine expansion in huntingtin because Hip-1 binds less avidly to mutant huntingtin than to the wild type protein. In Drosophila, production of the antiapoptotic protein p35 results in partial rescue of the pigment loss induced by mutant ataxin-3. In summary, expansions of polyglutamine tracts as well as several missense mutations in proteins implicated in neurodegenerative diseases alter the host protein,

leading to its accumulation or abnormal interactions. The neuronal dysfunction results from the downstream effects of such abnormal interactions (Figure 63–6). Understanding the Molecular Dynamics

of Neurodegenerative Diseases Suggests

Approaches to Therapeutic Intervention

## The discovery of the genetic bases and pathogenic mechanisms of various neurodegenerative diseases

offers us hope that therapies for these diseases will

soon emerge. Dopamine replacement therapy has so far been the only pharmacological option for Parkinson disease, but it is not ideal. Patients tend to develop tolerance and require higher and higher doses of the drugs, which in turn cause a side effect known as levodopa-induced dyskinesias. The uncontrollable movements of dyskinesia soon become as disruptive as the motor symptoms originally being treated. Advancements in deep brain stimulation are promising, but the procedure is invasive and therefore reserved for medication-refractory Parkinson disease. Patients with Huntington disease and SCA are worse off. No treatments that slow the progressive loss of motor coordination are currently available.

stage of all these disorders. Two major factors are implicated in the death of neurons: altered Ca 2+ and decreased induction of neuronal survival factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor in Huntington disease. There is, however, specific evidence that the caspase activity critical for apoptosis is a contributing factor in neurodegenerative diseases. Some of the polyglutamine proteins, such as huntingtin, androgen receptor, ataxin-3, and atrophin-1, are substrates for caspases

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1556

homeostasis However, several exciting therapeutic approaches that show great promise are under investigation. The most exciting therapeutic advances are those related to gene silencing of pathogenic products, including editing the genome, turning down transcription, or reducing expression of the protein. The most promising of these approaches in Huntington disease is the use of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs). ASOs are small single-stranded molecules designed to bind to complementary sequences found within the mRNA product

18/12/20 11:52 AM

2+

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Expanded CAG repeat in triplet repeat

diseases, or (not shown) missense

mutation in the gene that encodes the

disease protein in Parkinson disease or

amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Altered axonal

transport

Gliosis,

inammatory

response

disease and SCA1, in which expression of the mutant

<!-- image -->

Figure 63–6 Current model for patho-

genesis of the proteinopathies. The

disease-causing protein adopts an alter-

native conformation that changes its interactions with other proteins, DNA, or RNA, altering gene expression and perhaps generating an inflammatory response. These early events in pathogenesis occur years before symptoms appear. Since this alternative conformation is more difficult for the cell to refold or degrade, steady-state levels of the mutant protein rise slowly over a period of decades. As levels of the mutant protein rise, the neuron attempts to sequester the mutant protein and forms aggregates. As disease progresses, these proteinaceous deposits themselves may affect protein interactions or compromise the protein quality-control system.

one wants to downregulate. When an ASO binds its

mRNA target, it triggers degradation of the mRNA

through RNAse H activity while at the same time

sparing the ASO itself, thereby allowing it to bind to another mRNA molecule. In Huntington disease, several ASOs have been successfully used to reduce huntingtin protein levels. In fact, this approach is currently being utilized in clinical trials and holds promise for other diseases such as Parkinson disease. Ideally, therapies should be targeted at some of the earliest pathogenic stages, when intervention could in theory halt the disease or even allow recovery of func-

tion. Indeed, studies of mouse models of Huntington

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1557

gene can be turned off, have shown that the neuronal

dysfunction is reversible. When expression of the

transgene is turned off, the neurons have a chance to clear the mutant polyglutamine protein and regain normal activity. Because most neurodegenerative diseases progress over a period of decades, pharmacological interventions that even slightly modulate one or more of

the pathways described above could delay disease progression or improve function, which would greatly enhance the quality of life for patients suffering from these devastating disorders.

18/12/20 11:52 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Highlights

1. Late-onset neurodegenerative diseases collectively

afflict more than 25 million people throughout the

world, and it is anticipated that the prevalence of

- Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases will rise, given the increasing trend in life expectancy. 2. The identification of genes causing several forms of Parkinson disease and the various polyglutamine neurodegenerative diseases has allowed
- the accurate diagnosis and classification of these clinically heterogeneous disorders. 3. Although the gene product driving disease is widely expressed in the brain, there is selective neuronal vulnerability in all adult-onset neurodegenerative
- disorders. Perhaps a slight increase in abundance of the disease-driving protein and/or its interactors might explain such selective vulnerability. 4. Mitochondrial dysfunction is common in Parkinson disease; some of the genes mutated in Parkinson disease regulate mitochondrial turnover.
5. Studies in cell culture and model organisms have revealed a pathogenic mechanism common to adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases: protein
- misfolding. Mutations that cause the respective proteins to adopt an altered conformation gradually induce neuronal dysfunction either because of abnormal protein interactions or because of intracellular protein accumulation and altered activity. 6. The accumulation of polyglutamine-expanded proteins causes a variety of molecular changes in the cells, including alterations in gene expression,
- alterations in Ca 2+ homeostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and activation of caspases. 7. The discovery that many adult neurodegenerative disorders are reversible in mouse models gives hope that some of the neuronal dysfunction can be
- rescued if a treatment is implemented early enough in the disease course before cell death occurs. 8. The identification of pathways that mediate some of the pathogenic effects is likely to lead to the discovery of drugs that can first be tested in animals
- and then applied in humans. 9. Lowering the levels of disease-driving proteins can ameliorate their toxic effects. This opens the way for therapeutic strategies that either employ
- antisense oligonucleotides that target the toxic RNA or that use small molecules to target regulators of the toxic protein.

Huda Y. Zoghbi

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1558

Selected Reading

Gatchel JR, Zoghbi HY. 2005. Diseases of unstable repeat

expansion: mechanisms and common principles. Nat Rev

## Genet 6:743–755.

- Gusella JF, MacDonald ME. 2000. Molecular genetics: unmasking polyglutamine triggers in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 1:109–115.
- Haelterman NA, Yoon WH, Sandoval H, et al. 2014. A mitocentric view of Parkinson's disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 37:137–159.
- Laforet GA, Sapp E, Chase K, et al. 2001. Changes in cortical and striatal neurons predict behavioral and electrophysiological abnormalities in a transgenic murine model of
- Huntington's disease. J Neurosci 21:9112–9123. Moore DJ, West AB, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. 2005. Molecular pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:57–87.
- Pickrell AM, Youle RJ. 2015. The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson disease. Neuron 85:257–273.
- Sherman MY, Goldberg AL. 2001. Cellular defenses against unfolded proteins: a cell biologist thinks about neurodegenerative diseases. Neuron 1:15–32.
- Steffan JS, Bodai L, Pallos J, et al. 2001. Histone deacetylase inhibitors arrest polyglutamine-dependent neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Nature 413:739–743.
- Wong Y, Krainc D. 2017. α-Synuclein toxicity in neurodegeneration: mechanism and therapeutic strategies. Nat Med 23:1–13. Zoghbi HY, Orr HT. 2009. Pathogenic mechanisms of a
- polyglutamine-mediated neurodegenerative disease, spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. J Biol Chem. 284:7425–7429.
- References

Alexopoulou, Z, Lang J, Perrett RM, et al. 2016. Deubiquit-

inase Usp8 regulates α-synuclein clearance and modifies

its toxicity in Lewy body disease. Proc Natl Acad of Sci

- U S A 113:4688–4697. Alves-Cruzeiro JM, Mendonça L, Pereira de Almeida L, Nóbrega C. 2016. Motor dysfunctions and neuropathology in mouse models of spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: a
- comprehensive review. Front Neurosci 10:572. Auluck PK, Chan HY, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Bonini NM. 2002. Chaperone suppression of α-synuclein toxicity in a Drosophila model for Parkinson's disease. Science
- 295:865–888. Bonifati V. 2012. Autosomal recessive parkinsonism. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 18:S4–S6. Bonini NM, Gitler AD. 2011. Model organisms reveal insight into
- human neurodegenerative disease: ataxin-2 intermediatelength polyglutamine expansions are a risk factor for
- ALS. J Mol Neurosci 45:676–683. Burré, J. 2015. The synaptic function of α-synuclein. J Parkinson Dis 5:699–713. Chai Y, Koppenhafer SL, Bonini NM, Paulson HL. 1999.
- Analysis of the role of heat shock protein (Hsp) molecular chaperones in polyglutamine disease. J Neurosci
- 19:10338–10347.

18/12/20 11:52 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Highlights

1. Late-onset neurodegenerative diseases collectively

afflict more than 25 million people throughout the

world, and it is anticipated that the prevalence of

- Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases will rise, given the increasing trend in life expectancy. 2. The identification of genes causing several forms of Parkinson disease and the various polyglutamine neurodegenerative diseases has allowed
- the accurate diagnosis and classification of these clinically heterogeneous disorders. 3. Although the gene product driving disease is widely expressed in the brain, there is selective neuronal vulnerability in all adult-onset neurodegenerative
- disorders. Perhaps a slight increase in abundance of the disease-driving protein and/or its interactors might explain such selective vulnerability. 4. Mitochondrial dysfunction is common in Parkinson disease; some of the genes mutated in Parkinson disease regulate mitochondrial turnover.
5. Studies in cell culture and model organisms have revealed a pathogenic mechanism common to adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases: protein
- misfolding. Mutations that cause the respective proteins to adopt an altered conformation gradually induce neuronal dysfunction either because of abnormal protein interactions or because of intracellular protein accumulation and altered activity. 6. The accumulation of polyglutamine-expanded proteins causes a variety of molecular changes in the cells, including alterations in gene expression,
- alterations in Ca 2+ homeostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and activation of caspases. 7. The discovery that many adult neurodegenerative disorders are reversible in mouse models gives hope that some of the neuronal dysfunction can be
- rescued if a treatment is implemented early enough in the disease course before cell death occurs. 8. The identification of pathways that mediate some of the pathogenic effects is likely to lead to the discovery of drugs that can first be tested in animals
- and then applied in humans. 9. Lowering the levels of disease-driving proteins can ameliorate their toxic effects. This opens the way for therapeutic strategies that either employ
- antisense oligonucleotides that target the toxic RNA or that use small molecules to target regulators of the toxic protein.

Huda Y. Zoghbi

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1558

Selected Reading

Gatchel JR, Zoghbi HY. 2005. Diseases of unstable repeat

expansion: mechanisms and common principles. Nat Rev

## Genet 6:743–755.

- Gusella JF, MacDonald ME. 2000. Molecular genetics: unmasking polyglutamine triggers in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 1:109–115.
- Haelterman NA, Yoon WH, Sandoval H, et al. 2014. A mitocentric view of Parkinson's disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 37:137–159.
- Laforet GA, Sapp E, Chase K, et al. 2001. Changes in cortical and striatal neurons predict behavioral and electrophysiological abnormalities in a transgenic murine model of
- Huntington's disease. J Neurosci 21:9112–9123. Moore DJ, West AB, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. 2005. Molecular pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:57–87.
- Pickrell AM, Youle RJ. 2015. The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson disease. Neuron 85:257–273.
- Sherman MY, Goldberg AL. 2001. Cellular defenses against unfolded proteins: a cell biologist thinks about neurodegenerative diseases. Neuron 1:15–32.
- Steffan JS, Bodai L, Pallos J, et al. 2001. Histone deacetylase inhibitors arrest polyglutamine-dependent neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Nature 413:739–743.
- Wong Y, Krainc D. 2017. α-Synuclein toxicity in neurodegeneration: mechanism and therapeutic strategies. Nat Med 23:1–13. Zoghbi HY, Orr HT. 2009. Pathogenic mechanisms of a
- polyglutamine-mediated neurodegenerative disease, spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. J Biol Chem. 284:7425–7429.
- References

Alexopoulou, Z, Lang J, Perrett RM, et al. 2016. Deubiquit-

inase Usp8 regulates α-synuclein clearance and modifies

its toxicity in Lewy body disease. Proc Natl Acad of Sci

- U S A 113:4688–4697. Alves-Cruzeiro JM, Mendonça L, Pereira de Almeida L, Nóbrega C. 2016. Motor dysfunctions and neuropathology in mouse models of spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: a
- comprehensive review. Front Neurosci 10:572. Auluck PK, Chan HY, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Bonini NM. 2002. Chaperone suppression of α-synuclein toxicity in a Drosophila model for Parkinson's disease. Science
- 295:865–888. Bonifati V. 2012. Autosomal recessive parkinsonism. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 18:S4–S6. Bonini NM, Gitler AD. 2011. Model organisms reveal insight into
- human neurodegenerative disease: ataxin-2 intermediatelength polyglutamine expansions are a risk factor for
- ALS. J Mol Neurosci 45:676–683. Burré, J. 2015. The synaptic function of α-synuclein. J Parkinson Dis 5:699–713. Chai Y, Koppenhafer SL, Bonini NM, Paulson HL. 1999.
- Analysis of the role of heat shock protein (Hsp) molecular chaperones in polyglutamine disease. J Neurosci
- 19:10338–10347.

18/12/20 11:52 AM

Chapter 63 / Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Nervous System

Chesselet M.-F, Richter F, Zhu C, et al. 2012. A progressive

mouse model of Parkinson's disease: the thy1-aSyn

('Line 61') Mice. Neurotherapeutics 9:297–314.

- Cummings CJ, Mancini MA, Antalffy B, et al. 1998. Chaperone suppression of ataxin-1 aggregation and altered subcellular proteasome localization imply protein misfolding in
- SCA1. Nat Genet 19:148–154. Cummings CJ, Sun Y, Opal P, et al. 2001. Over-expression of inducible HSP70 chaperone suppresses neuropathology and improves motor function in SCA1 mice. Hum Mol
- Genet 10:1511–1518. Davies SW, Turmaine M, Cozens BA, et al. 1997. Formation of neuronal intranuclear inclusions underlies the neurological dysfunction in mice transgenic for the HD mutation.
- Cell 90:537–548. Feany MB, Bender WW. 2000. A Drosophila model of Parkinson's disease. Nature 404:394–398. Fernandez-Funez P, Nino-Rosales ML, de Gouyon B, et al.
2000. Identification of genes that modify ataxin-1-induced neurodegeneration. Nature 408:101–106.
- Fryer JD1, Yu P, Kang H, et al. 2011. Exercise and genetic rescue of SCA1 via the transcriptional repressor Capicua. Science. 334:690–3.
- Fujioka S, Wszolek ZK. 2012. Update on genetics of parkinsonism. Neurodegener Dis 10:257–260. Gennarino VA, Singh RK, White JJ, et al. 2015. Pumilio1 hap-
- loinsufficiency leads to SCA1-like neurodegeneration by increasing wild-type Ataxin1 levels. Cell 160:1087–1098.
- Hagerman RJ, Hagerman PJ. 2002. The fragile X premutation: into the phenotypic fold. Curr Opin Genet Dev 12:278–283.


Lucking CB, Durr A, Bonifati V, et al. 2000. Association

between early-onset Parkinson's disease and mutations

in the parkin gene. N Engl J Med 342:1560–1567.

- Luthi-Carter R, Strand A, Peters NL, et al. 2000. Decreased expression of striatal signaling genes in a mouse model of Huntington's disease. Hum Mol Genet 9:1259–1271.
- Masliah E, Rockenstein E, Veinbergs I, et al. 2000. Dopaminergic loss and inclusion body formation in α-synuclein mice: implications for neurodegenerative disorders. Science
- 287:1265–1269. Matsuura T, Yamagata T, Burgess DL, et al. 2000. Large expansion of the ATTCT pentanucleotide repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 10. Nat Genet 26:191–194.
- McCampbell A, Taye AA, Whitty L, Penney E, Steffan JS, Fischbeck KH. 2001. Histone deacetylase inhibitors reduce polyglutamine toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 98:15179–15184. Miller J, Arrasate M, Shaby BA, Mitra S, Masliah E, Finkbeiner S. 2010. Quantitative relationships between huntingtin levels, polyglutamine length, inclusion body
- formation, and neuronal death provide novel insight into Huntington's disease molecular pathogenesis. J. Neurosci. 30:10541–10550. Nakamura K, Jeong SY, Uchihara T, et al. 2001. SCA17, a novel autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia caused by an expanded polyglutamine in TATA-binding protein. Hum
- Mol Genet 10:1441–1448. Nalls MA, Pankratz N, Lill CM, et al. 2014. Large-scale metaanalysis of genome-wide association data identifies six new risk loci for Parkinson's disease. Nat Genet 46:989–993.
- region of Nucifora FC, Sasaki M, Peters MF, et al. 2001. Interference by huntingtin and atrophin-1 with cbp-mediated transcription leading to cellular toxicity. Science 291:2423–2428.
- Holmes SE, O'Hearn EE, McInnis MG, et al. 1999. Expansion of a novel CAG trinucleotide repeat in the 5 ′ PPP2R2B is associated with SCA12. Nat Genet 23:391–392.
- Huynh DP, Del Bigio MR, Ho DH, Pulst SM. 1999. Expression of ataxin-2 in brains from normal individuals and patients with Alzheimer's disease and spinocerebellar ataxia 2.
- Orr HT, Zoghbi HY. 2007. Trinucleotide repeat disorders. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:575–621. Panov AV, Gutekunst CA, Leavitt BR, et al. 2002. Early mito-
- Ann Neurol 45:232–241. Huynh DP, Figueroa K, Hoang N, Pulst SM. 2000. Nuclear localization or inclusion body formation of ataxin-2 are not necessary for SCA2 pathogenesis in mouse or human.
- Nat Genet 26:44–50. Kegel KB, Kim M, Sapp E, McIntyre C, Castano JG, Aronin N, DiFiglia M. 2000. Huntingtin expression stimulates endosomal-lysosomal activity, endosome tubulation, and
- autophagy. J Neurosci 20:7268-7278. Koob MD, Moseley ML, Schut LJ, et al. 1999. An untranslated CTG expansion causes a novel form of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA8). Nat Genet 21:379–384.
- Kruger R, Kuhn W, Muller T, et al. 1998. Ala30Pro mutation in the gene encoding α-synuclein in Parkinson's disease. Nat Genet 18:106–108.
- La Spada AR, Fu YH, Sopher BL, et al. 2001. Polyglutamineexpanded ataxin-7 antagonizes CRX function and induces cone-rod dystrophy in a mouse model of SCA7. Neuron
- 31:913–927. Leroy E, Boyer R, Auburger G, Leube B, et al. 1998. The ubiquitin pathway in Parkinson's disease. Nature 395: 451–452.

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1559

- chondrial calcium defects in Huntington's disease are a direct effect of polyglutamines. Nat Neurosci 5:731–736.
- Park J, Al-Ramahi I, Tan Q, et al. 2013. RAS-MAPK-MSK1 pathway modulates ataxin 1 protein levels and toxicity in SCA1. Nature 498:325–331.
- Piedras-Renteria ES, Watase K, Harata N, et al. 2001. Increased expression of alpha 1A Ca 2+ channel currents arising from expanded trinucleotide repeats in spinocer-
- ebellar ataxia type 6. J Neurosci 21:9185–9193. Polymeropoulos MH, Lavedan C, Leroy E, et al. 1997. Mutation in the α-synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson's disease. Science 276:2045–2047.
- Ramachandran PS, Boudreau RL, Schaefer KA, La Spada AR, Davidson BL. 2014. Nonallele specific silencing of ataxin-7 improves disease phenotypes in a mouse model
- of SCA7. Mol Ther 22:1635–1642. Ravikumar B, Vacher C, Berger Z, et al. 2004. Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of Huntington
- disease. Nat Genet 36:585–595. Rott R, Szargel R, Haskin J. 2011. α-Synuclein fate is determined by USP9X-regulated monoubiquitination. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:18666–18671.

18/12/20 11:52 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Saudou F, Humbert S. 2016. The biology of huntingtin. Neuron

89:910–926.

Sidransky E, Lopez G. 2012. The link between the GBA gene

- and parkinsonism. Lancet Neurol 11:986–998. Singleton AB, Farrer M, Johnson J, et al. 2003. α-Synuclein locus
- triplication causes Parkinson's disease. Science 302:841. Smith WW, Pei Z, Jiang H, et al. 2005. Leucine-rich repeat
- kinase 2 (LRRK2) interacts with parkin, and mutant LRRK2 induces neuronal degeneration. Proc Natl Acad
- Sci U S A 102:18676–18681. Surmeier JD, Guzman JN, Sanchez-Padilla J, Schumacker PT. 2011. The role of calcium and mitochondrial oxidant stress in the loss of substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic
- neurons in Parkinson's disease. Neuroscience 198:221–231. Valente EM, Abou-Sleiman PM, Caputo V, et al. 2004. Hereditary early-onset Parkinson's disease caused by mutations in PINK1. Science 304:1158–1160.

Kandel-Ch63\_1544-1560.indd 1560

Vonsattel JP, DiFiglia M. 1998. Huntington's disease. J Neuro-

pathol Exp Neurol 57:369–384.

Warrick JM, Chan HY, Gray-Board GL, Chai Y, Paulson HL,

- Bonini NM. 1999. Suppression of polyglutamine-mediated neurodegeneration in Drosophila by the molecular chaper-
- one HSP70. Nat Genet 23:425–428. Wyant KJ, Riddler AJ, Dayalu P. 2017. Huntington's disease— update on treatments. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 17: 1–11.
- Zhang S, Xu L, Lee J, Xu T. 2002. Drosophila atrophin homolog functions as a transcriptional corepressor in multiple developmental processes. Cell 108:45–56.
- Zu T, Duvick LA, Kaytor MD, et al. 2004. Recovery from polyglutamine-induced neurodegeneration in conditional SCA1 transgenic mice. J Neurosci 24:8853–8861.

18/12/20 11:52 AM


The Aging Brain

The Structure and Function of the Brain Change With Age

Cognitive Decline Is Significant and Debilitating in a

Substantial Fraction of the Elderly

Alzheimer Disease Is the Most Common Cause of Dementia

The Brain in Alzheimer Disease Is Altered by Atrophy, Amyloid Plaques, and Neurofibrillary Tangles

Amyloid Plaques Contain Toxic Peptides That Contribute

to Alzheimer Pathology Neurofibrillary Tangles Contain

Microtubule-Associated Proteins Risk Factors for Alzheimer Disease Have Been Identified

Alzheimer Disease Can Now Be Diagnosed Well but Available Treatments Are Unsatisfactory

Highlights

T

he average life span in the united states in

1900 was about 50 years. By 2015, it was approxi-

mately 77 years for men and 82 for women

(Figure 64–1). The average is even higher in 30 other countries. These increases result largely from a reduction in infant mortality, the development of vaccines and antibiotics, better nutrition, improved public health measures, and advances in the treatment and prevention of heart disease and stroke. Because of increased life expectancy, along with the large cohort of "baby boomers" born soon after World War II, the elderly are the most rapidly growing segment of the US population. Increased longevity is a double-edged sword since age-related cognitive alterations are increasingly prevalent. The magnitude of the change varies

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1561

widely among individuals. For many, the alterations

are mild and have relatively little impact on the quality

of life—the momentary lapses we jokingly call "senior

moments." Other cognitive impairments, although not debilitating, are troubling enough to hinder our ability to manage life independently. The dementias, however, erode memory and reasoning and alter personality. Of these, Alzheimer disease is the most prevalent. As the population ages, neuroscientists, neurologists, and psychologists have begun to devote more energy to understanding age-related changes in the

brain. The primary motivation has been to find treatments for Alzheimer disease and other dementias, but it is also important to understand the normal process of cognitive decline with age. After all, age is the greatest risk factor for a wide variety of neurodegenerative disorders. Understanding what happens to our brains as we age may not only improve the quality of life for the general population but may also provide clues that will eventually help us vanquish seemingly unrelated pathological changes. With this in mind, we begin this chapter with a consideration of the normal aging of the brain. We then turn to the broad range of pathological changes in cog-

nition, and finally focus on Alzheimer disease. The Structure and Function of the Brain

Change With Age

## As we grow old, our bodies change—our hair thins, our skin wrinkles, and our joints creak. It is no surprise

then that our brain also changes. Indeed, the wide-

spread behavioral alterations that occur with age are

19/01/21 9:21 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Figure 64–1 The human life span is increas-

ing. The average life span in the United States

has increased rapidly over the past 100 years.

(Adapted from Strehler 1975; Arias 2004.)



<!-- image -->

signs of underlying alterations in the nervous system.


protective gene variant, discussed below, is the epsilon

For example, as motor skills decline, posture becomes

less erect, gait is slower, stride length is shorter, and

postural reflexes often become sluggish. Although muscles weaken and bones become more brittle, these motor abnormalities result in large part from subtle processes that involve the peripheral and central nervous systems. Sleep patterns also change with age; older people sleep less and wake more frequently. Mental functions ascribed to the forebrain, such as memory and problem-solving abilities, also decline. Age-related declines in mental abilities are highly variable, in both rate and severity (Figure 64–2A). Although most people experience a gradual decline in

mental agility, for some, the decline is rapid, whereas others retain their cognitive powers throughout life— Giuseppe Verdi, Eleanor Roosevelt, and Pablo Picasso are well-known examples of the latter category. Titian continued to paint masterpieces in his late 80s, and Sophocles is said to have written Oedipus at Colonus in his 92nd year. The fact that elderly people with completely preserved mental function are rare suggests that there may be special properties in the life experiences or genes of these people. Accordingly, there has been great interest in studying individuals who retain nearly intact cognition into their tenth or even eleventh decade. These centenarians may provide insight into environmental or genetic factors that protect against normal age-related cognitive decline or the more devastating pathological descent into dementia. One

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1562

2 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene.

An interesting finding that has emerged from stud-

ies of many individuals is that some cognitive capacities decline significantly with age while others are largely

spared (Figure 64–2B). For example, working and long-term memories, visuospatial abilities (measured by arranging blocks into a design or drawing a threedimensional figure), and verbal fluency (measured by rapid naming of objects or naming as many words as possible that start with a specific letter) usually decline with old age. On the other hand, measures of vocabulary, information, and comprehension often show minimal decline in normal individuals well into the 80s. Age-related changes in memory, motor activity, mood, sleep pattern, appetite, and neuroendocrine function result from alterations in the structure and

function of the brain. Even the healthiest 80-year-old brain does not look like it did at the age of 20. Elderly people exhibit mild shrinkage in the volume of the brain and a loss in brain weight, as well as enlargement of the cerebral ventricles (Figure 64–3A). The decreases in brain weight average 0.2% per year from college age onward, and about 0.5% per year in the 70s. These changes could result from death of neurons. Indeed, some neurons are lost with age. For example, 25% or more of the motor neurons that innervate

skeletal muscles die in generally healthy elderly individuals. As we will see, neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer disease markedly accelerate the

19/01/21 9:21 AM

A Individual variation


<!-- image -->

1.0

0.5

A. Scores of three people who were given a battery of cogni- Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain Individual C


Long-term memory Working memory Vocabulary

0.6

0.4

tive tests annually for decades. Person A declined rapidly. Persons B and C showed similar cognitive performances into their 80s but then diverged. (Adapted from Rubin et al. 1998.)

<!-- image -->

death of neurons (Figure 64–3B). In most parts of the

healthy brain, however, there is minimal to no neu-

ronal loss simply because of age, so brain shrinkage

must arise from other factors. In fact, analysis of the brains of humans and experimental animals reveals structural alterations in both neurons and glia. Myelin is fragmented and lost, com-

promising the integrity of white matter. At the same time, the density of the dendritic arbors of cortical and other neurons decreases, resulting in shrinkage of neuropil. Levels of enzymes that synthesize some neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine, decrease with age, and this decline presumably results in functional defects in synapses

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1563

20s 40s 60s 80s

B. Average scores on several cognitive tests administered

to a large number of people. Long-term declarative memory

and working memory decline throughout life and more so in

advanced age. In contrast, knowledge of vocabulary is maintained. (Adapted from Park et al. 1996.)

that use these transmitters. Synapse structure is also

altered, at least at the neuromuscular junction (Figure

64–4), raising the possibility that structural changes

-

also lead to functional deficits at central synapses. Finally, the number of synapses in the neocortex and many other regions of the brain declines (Figure 64–5). These cellular changes interfere with the integrity of the neural circuits that mediate our mental activi ties. Age-related loss of synapses along with impair-

ment in function of remaining synapses are thought to be important contributors to cognitive decline. Changes in white matter are widespread but are especially notable in the prefrontal and temporal cortex. They may underlie alterations in executive functions

19/01/21 9:21 AM




Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A Age-related changes

Normal 22-year old

Figure 64–3 Changes in brain

structure with age and at the onset

of Alzheimer disease. (Also see

Figure 64–8.) A. Images of normal 22- and 89-yearold brains reveal changes in the structure of the living brain. (Reproduced,

with permission, from R. Buckner.) B. Images of the same individual over a 4-year period illustrate the progressive shrinking of cortical

structures and the beginning of ventricular enlargement (red). These structural changes are evident prior to the onset of behavioral symptoms. (Reproduced, with permission, from N. Fox.)

<!-- image -->

Asymptomatic 45-year old Normal 89-year old Onset of behavioral symptoms 4 years later

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

and the ability to focus attention and encode and store

memory, functions that are localized in frontal-striatal

systems and the temporal lobes. The loss of white mat-

ter may also help explain the recent finding that the elderly brain is less able to support synchronization of activity in widely separated areas that normally work together to carry out complex mental activities. Disruption of these large-scale networks could be an important cause of cognitive decline. It was long thought that aging resulted from progressive deterioration of cells and tissues due to accumulated genetic damage or toxic waste products. In

support of this idea was the finding that mitotic cells removed from animals and placed in a tissue culture dish divide only for a limited number of times before they age and die. This view of "preordained" aging has

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1564

changed radically over the past 10 to 20 years, primarily

as a result of the discovery in model organisms of muta-

tions that significantly extend life span (Figure 64–6).

Such dramatic discoveries established that the aging process is under active genetic control. One such regulatory pathway that has been characterized

includes insulin and insulin-like growth factors, their receptors, and the signaling programs they activate. Disruption of these genes actually increases the resistance of cells to lethal oxidative damage. It is thought that the normal forms of these genes have been selected through evolution because they benefit the organism during the reproductive period. Their deleterious effects on longevity, once the animals are past reproductive age, may be an unfortunate side effect about which evolution cares little.

19/01/21 9:21 AM

Figure 64–4 Age-related changes in dendritic and

synaptic structure. Cortical pyramidal neurons in

rodents lose dendritic spines with age. Neuromuscular Young

synapses in rodents also exhibit age-related changes in

structure. (Spine images reproduced, with permission, from J. Luebke; synapse images reproduced, with permission, from G. Valdez.)

<!-- image -->

These findings have two major implications for cognitive decline. Research to explore this link

understanding how aging affects the nervous system.

First, the biochemical mechanisms that lead to, or pro-

tect us from, the ravages of age are likely contributors to the changes in neurons that lead to age-related


between cellular change and cognitive functioning is

now underway in model organisms. Second, and per-

haps more exciting, research on the pathways uncovered by genetic studies can identify pharmacological

Stereoacuity,

stereopsis

Figure 64–5 Age-related changes in synaptic

density. Early cognitive development is accompanied

by a marked increase in synapse density in different

regions of the human cerebral cortex. Developmental landmarks through age 10 months are indicated. The density of cortical synapses declines with age. (Adapted from Huttenlocher 2002.)

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1565

Visual Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain

<!-- image -->


Dendritic spines Neuromuscular synapse

30 50


19/01/21 9:21 AM


Worm


<!-- image -->

coupled receptor)

100 120

or environmental strategies for extending life span or

health span (the period during which one remains gen-

erally healthy).

To date, the best-validated environmental strategy for extending life span (in organisms ranging from yeast to worms to primates) is caloric restriction. It appears

that caloric restriction acts through genes in the insulin pathway mentioned above and may involve a set of enzymes called sirtuins. The sirtuins are activated by the compound resveratrol, originally isolated from red wine. Resveratrol, in turn, retards some aspects of aging, including cognitive decline, when administered to mice. While it is unlikely that resveratrol will serve as a fountain of youth in humans, it nevertheless exemplifies the new chemistries that are currently under consideration. These chemical strategies use model organisms to explore not only the positive factors that lead to aging but also the constraints that prevent model organisms, and presumably humans, from remaining generally healthy throughout their life span. Cognitive Decline Is Significant and

Debilitating in a Substantial Fraction

of the Elderly

## In most people, age-related cognitive changes do not seriously compromise the quality of life. In some elderly

people, however, cognitive decline reaches a level that

<!-- image -->

(growth hormone

receptor signalling)

can be viewed as pathological. At the lower end of the abnormal range is a constellation of changes known as mild cognitive impairment (MCI). This syndrome is characterized by memory loss with or without other cognitive impairments that go beyond what is seen in normal aging. Individuals with MCI may be able to carry out most activities of daily living, although the impairments are noticeable to others and often influence the ability of the affected person to carry out certain activities that are important or pleasurable to them, such as managing finances or playing word games. Importantly, MCI is a syndrome, not a diagnosis. Many underlying problems such as depression, overmedication, strokes, and neurodegenerative diseases 1,300 1,500

Figure 64–6 Life span can be increased through genetic

<!-- image -->

mutation. Genetic mutations in specific receptors and signal-

ing proteins markedly enhance life span in mutant strains of the

worm, fly, and mouse, indicating that genetic regulatory mechanisms affect aging and life span. (Top adapted from Hekimi and Guarente 2003; middle reproduced, with permission, from Yi, Seroude, and Benzer 1998. Copyright © 1998 AAAS; bottom adapted from Brown-Borg et al. 1996.)

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1566

can contribute to MCI. Approximately half of individuals with MCI have underlying Alzheimer disease, and more than 90% of this group will progress to fullblown dementia within 5 years from the time of diagnosis of MCI (Figure 64–7). As discussed below, there are now biomarkers that can suggest the presence of underlying Alzheimer disease pathology. As yet, however, there are no good biomarkers for predicting progression to dementia in people with MCI resulting from diseases other than Alzheimer.

19/01/21 9:21 AM

Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System Figure 64–7 Cognitive performance can vary widely with age. The chart shows current thinking about the etiology of Alzheimer disease (AD). This Like MCI, dementia is also a syndrome that Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain Healthy aging Preclinical AD

gradual process, which results from a combination of biological, genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors, eventually sets some people on a course to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and then dementia. Other people, with a different genetic makeup or a different combination of factors over a lifetime, continue on a course of healthy cognitive aging. (From the National Institute on Aging: http://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/ part-2-what-happens-brain-ad/changing-brain-ad.)

Amnestic MCI

Clinically diagnosed AD

Normal

age-related

memory loss

Total loss of

independent

function

describe the cognitive disease that we now call schizo-

<!-- image -->

involves progressive impairment of memory as well

as other cognitive abilities such as language, problem

solving, judgment, calculation, or attention. It is associated with a variety of diseases. The most common is Alzheimer disease, as discussed below. The second most common cause in the elderly is cerebrovascular disease, particularly strokes that lead to focal ischemia and consequent infarction in the brain. Large lesions in the cortex are often associated with language disturbances (aphasia), hemiparesis, or neglect syndromes, depending on which portions of

the brain are compromised. Small infarctions in white matter or deeper structures of the brain, termed lacunes, also occur as a consequence of hypertension and diabetes. In small numbers, these infarctions may be asymptomatic, or they may contribute to what appears to be normal age-associated cognitive decline or certain cases of MCI. As vascular lesions increase in number and size, however, their effects accumulate, and eventually, they can lead to dementia. Numerous other conditions can lead to dementia, including Parkinson disease, Lewy body dementia, frontotemporal dementia, alcoholism, drug intoxica-

tions, infections such as HIV and syphilis, brain tumors, subdural hematomas, repeated brain trauma, vitamin deficiencies (notably lack of vitamin B 12 disease, and a variety of other metabolic disorders. Repeated brain trauma can result in what is termed chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). Numerous cases of CTE in American professional athletes have recently been reported. In some patients, schizophrenia or depression may mimic a dementia syndrome. (Emil Kraepelin chose the term "dementia praecox" to

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1567

phrenia.) Because some dementias can be treated, it is

important for the physician to probe differential diag-

noses of dementia based on clinical history, physical examinations, and laboratory studies. Alzheimer Disease Is the Most Common

Cause of Dementia

## In 1901, Alois Alzheimer examined a middle-aged woman who had developed a progressive loss of cog-

nitive abilities. Her memory became increasingly

impaired. She could no longer orient herself, even in her own home, and she hid objects in her apartment. At times, she believed that people intended to murder her. She was institutionalized in a psychiatric hospital and died approximately 5 years after she was first seen by Dr. Alzheimer. After death, Alzheimer performed

an autopsy that revealed specific alterations in the cerebral cortex, described below. The constellation of behavioral symptoms and physical alterations was subsequently given the name Alzheimer disease (AD). This case caught Alzheimer's attention because it occurred in middle age; the initial clinical manifestations of AD (usually memory loss and decreased execu-

), thyroid tive function) most commonly appear after age 65. The prevalence of AD at age 70 is about 2%, whereas after age 80, it is greater than 20%. Early-onset cases before age 65 are often familial (autosomal dominant AD), and gene mutations have been discovered in many of these patients, as we shall discuss below. In fact, new genetic tests on preserved brain samples from Alzheimer's first case recently showed that her disease resulted

19/01/21 9:21 AM
Figure 64–7 Cognitive performance can vary

widely with age. The chart shows current thinking

about the etiology of Alzheimer disease (AD). This

gradual process, which results from a combination of biological, genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors, eventually sets some people on a course to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and then dementia. Other people, with a different genetic makeup or a different combination of factors over a lifetime, continue on a course of healthy cognitive aging. (From the National Institute on Aging: http://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/ part-2-what-happens-brain-ad/changing-brain-ad.)

Like MCI, dementia is also a syndrome that Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain Healthy aging Preclinical AD

Amnestic MCI

Clinically diagnosed AD

Normal

age-related

memory loss

Total loss of

independent

function

describe the cognitive disease that we now call schizo-

<!-- image -->

involves progressive impairment of memory as well

as other cognitive abilities such as language, problem

solving, judgment, calculation, or attention. It is associated with a variety of diseases. The most common is Alzheimer disease, as discussed below. The second most common cause in the elderly is cerebrovascular disease, particularly strokes that lead to focal ischemia and consequent infarction in the brain. Large lesions in the cortex are often associated with language disturbances (aphasia), hemiparesis, or neglect syndromes, depending on which portions of

the brain are compromised. Small infarctions in white matter or deeper structures of the brain, termed lacunes, also occur as a consequence of hypertension and diabetes. In small numbers, these infarctions may be asymptomatic, or they may contribute to what appears to be normal age-associated cognitive decline or certain cases of MCI. As vascular lesions increase in number and size, however, their effects accumulate, and eventually, they can lead to dementia. Numerous other conditions can lead to dementia, including Parkinson disease, Lewy body dementia, frontotemporal dementia, alcoholism, drug intoxica-

tions, infections such as HIV and syphilis, brain tumors, subdural hematomas, repeated brain trauma, vitamin deficiencies (notably lack of vitamin B 12 disease, and a variety of other metabolic disorders. Repeated brain trauma can result in what is termed chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). Numerous cases of CTE in American professional athletes have recently been reported. In some patients, schizophrenia or depression may mimic a dementia syndrome. (Emil Kraepelin chose the term "dementia praecox" to

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1567

phrenia.) Because some dementias can be treated, it is

important for the physician to probe differential diag-

noses of dementia based on clinical history, physical examinations, and laboratory studies. Alzheimer Disease Is the Most Common

Cause of Dementia

## In 1901, Alois Alzheimer examined a middle-aged woman who had developed a progressive loss of cog-

nitive abilities. Her memory became increasingly

impaired. She could no longer orient herself, even in her own home, and she hid objects in her apartment. At times, she believed that people intended to murder her. She was institutionalized in a psychiatric hospital and died approximately 5 years after she was first seen by Dr. Alzheimer. After death, Alzheimer performed

an autopsy that revealed specific alterations in the cerebral cortex, described below. The constellation of behavioral symptoms and physical alterations was subsequently given the name Alzheimer disease (AD). This case caught Alzheimer's attention because it occurred in middle age; the initial clinical manifestations of AD (usually memory loss and decreased execu-

), thyroid tive function) most commonly appear after age 65. The prevalence of AD at age 70 is about 2%, whereas after age 80, it is greater than 20%. Early-onset cases before age 65 are often familial (autosomal dominant AD), and gene mutations have been discovered in many of these patients, as we shall discuss below. In fact, new genetic tests on preserved brain samples from Alzheimer's first case recently showed that her disease resulted

19/01/21 9:21 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

from a mutation of a gene called presenilin-1, the

most common cause of familial or dominantly inher-

ited AD. Late-onset AD (onset at age 65 or greater) is

more often sporadic, implying that there is no single causative gene as occurs in dominantly inherited AD. Nonetheless, it is clear that genetics contribute greatly to risk for even late-onset AD more likely through variants that affect susceptibility, along with environmental and other contributing factors that are just now being uncovered. Both early-onset and late-onset varieties of AD usually present with a selective defect in episodic memory and executive function. At first, language, strength,

reflexes, and sensory abilities and motor skills are nearly normal. Gradually, however, memory and attention are lost, along with cognitive abilities such as problem solving, language, calculation, and visuospatial perception. Unsurprisingly, these cognitive losses lead to behavioral alterations, and some patients develop psychotic symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions. All patients suffer progressive impairment of mental functions and activities of daily living; in the late stages, they become mute, incontinent, and bedridden.

Alzheimer disease affects approximately one-eighth

of people older than 65 years. More than 5 million

people in the United States now suffer from dementia

due to AD. Because the elderly population is increasing rapidly, the population at risk for AD is growing rapidly. During the next 25 years, the number of people with AD in the United States is expected to triple, as will the cost of caring for patients no longer able to care for themselves. Thus, AD is one of society's major public health problems. The Brain in Alzheimer Disease Is Altered

by Atrophy, Amyloid Plaques, and

Neurofibrillary Tangles

## Three categories of brain abnormalities are found in AD. First, because of neuronal and synaptic loss, the

brain is atrophied, with narrowed gyri, widened sulci,

reduced brain weight, and enlarged ventricles (Figure 64–8). These changes are also seen in milder forms in cognitively intact elderly people who die from other causes. Thus, AD is a neurodegenerative disease.

Figure 64–3.) (Whole brain photos reproduced, with permis-

sion, from University of Alabama at Birmingham Department

of Pathology © PEIR Digital Library [http://peir.net]; brain slice

<!-- image -->

matched normal brains, the brain of an Alzheimer patient dis-

plays marked shrinkage and ventricular enlargement. (See also

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1568

photos reproduced, with permission, from A.C. McKee.)

19/01/21 9:22 AM

Plaque

Figure 64–9 Plaques and tangles in the Alzheimer brain. A

section of cerebral cortex from the brain of an individual with

severe Alzheimer disease shows characteristic plaques and

Tangles Tangle Irregular dendrite Paired helical laments

neurofibrillary tangles. (Images reproduced, with permission, from James Goldman.) Left: The diagram shows a neuron containing neurofibrillary tangles in the cell body and axon. Amyloid plaques are shown in the neuropil; one of them surrounds a dendrite, which dis-

<!-- image -->

plays an altered, swollen shape. Tangles, composed of bundles of paired helical filaments, are comprised of abnormal polymers of hyperphosphorylated tau protein, and amyloid plaques Second, the brains of AD patients contain extracel-

lular plaques composed predominantly of an aggre-

gated form of a peptide called amyloid-β, or Aβ, which

is cleaved from a normally produced protein. Aggregates of Aβ are called amyloid plaques. Much of the Aβ in plaques is fibrillar; aggregates of Aβ appear in a β-pleated sheet conformation along with other proteins that co-aggregate with Aβ (Figure 64–9). Amyloid can be detected when stained with dyes such as Congo red, and is refractive when viewed in polarized light or when stained with thioflavin S and viewed with fluorescence optics. The extracellular deposits of amyloid are surrounded by swollen axons and dendrites (neuritic dystrophy). These neuronal processes in turn are surrounded by the cell processes of activated astrocytes and microglia (inflammatory cells). Aβ can also form amyloid deposits in the walls of arterioles in the brain, producing what is known as cerebral amyloid angiopathy. This occurs to varying extents in up to 90% of patients who develop AD, but it can also occur independently of AD. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy can lead to ischemic stroke, and it is a common cause of hemorrhagic stroke in the elderly.

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1569

Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain

Tangle Tangle

Healthy

neuron

are extracellular deposits of polymers of the amyloid-β (A4)

peptide.

Middle: A section of neocortex from a patient with Alzheimer

disease treated with a silver stain shows neuronal cell bodies containing neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil containing amy-

loid plaques. Right: A higher magnification of the cortex shows neurofibrillary tangles in neuronal cell bodies and a healthy neuron without a tangle. Many thin silver-positive cell processes are seen in

the neuropil. Third, many neurons that are affected by Alzheimer

pathology but still alive have cytoskeletal abnormali-

ties, the most dramatic of which is the accumulation

of neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads (Figure 64–9). The tangles are filamentous inclusions in the cell bodies and dendrites that contain paired helical filaments and 15-nm straight filaments. These filaments are made up of an aggregated form of the normal microtubule-associated protein tau. In AD, tangles do not occur uniformly throughout the brain, but rather affect specific regions. The entorhinal cortex, the hippocampus, parts of the neo-

cortex, and the nucleus basalis are especially vulnerable (Figure 64–10). Alterations in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus likely underlie the problems with episodic memory that are among the first symptoms of AD. Abnormalities in the basal forebrain cholinergic systems may contribute to cognitive difficulties and attention deficits. These cholinergic abnormalities contrast with those in frontostriatal circuits that correlate with age-related cognitive decline in normal subjects. The combination of anatomical differences, pathological changes, widespread neuronal death, and genetic

19/01/21 9:22 AM



Figure 64–10 Neurofibrillary

tangles and senile plaques are

concentrated in different regions

of the Alzheimer brain.  (Adapted, with permission, from Arnold et al. 1991. Copyright © 1991, Oxford University Press.)

mutations (see below) argue against the idea, once

Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

Neurobrillary tangles

<!-- image -->

prevalent, that AD is an aberrant form of normal aging

processes.

Amyloid Plaques Contain Toxic Peptides That Contribute to Alzheimer Pathology

## The main constituent of amyloid plaques, aggregates of Aβ peptides, were first isolated in the early 1980s by centrifugation, based on their low solubility. The

predominant peptides were 40 and 42 amino acids in length (the 40 residues plus two additional amino acids at the carboxy terminal end). Biochemical studies showed that the Aβ42 peptide nucleates more rapidly than Aβ40 into amyloid fibrils. Considerable experimental evidence indicates that Aβ42 drives the initial aggregation, although Aβ40 also accumulates to a significant extent, especially in

cerebral amyloid angiopathy. For neurons in culture, the forms of the Aβ42 peptide that are larger than a monomer are generally more toxic than aggregated forms of Aβ40. These results implicate Aβ42 as a key driver of amyloid formation as well as Aβ toxicity. Once it was discovered that Aβ peptides 38 to 43 amino acids in length are formed by cleavage of

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1570

a precursor protein, researchers set out to isolate the

precursor. The precursor was found in the mid-1980s,

molecularly cloned, and named the amyloid precursor

protein (APP). It is a large transmembrane glycoprotein that is present in all types of cells but is expressed at its highest levels in neurons. The normal functions of APP in the brain are not understood. How is APP processed to form Aβ peptides? The answer has turned out to be complex. Three enzymes, α-, β-, and γ-secretase, cut APP into pieces. The β- and

γ-secretases cleave APP to generate soluble extracellular fragments that are released into the interstitial fluid. These are the Aβ peptides, which include part of the transmembrane segment of APP (Figure 64–11). The cleavage by γ-secretase is unusual in that it occurs in a membrane-spanning portion of APP, a region long thought to be immune from hydrolysis because it is surrounded by lipids rather than water. Cleavage by α-secretase in the middle of the Aβ sequence prevents the formation of Aβ peptides. The enzymes that account for α-, β-, and γ-secretases have been isolated and characterized. The enzyme α-secretase is a member of a large fam-

ily of extracellular proteases called ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) that are responsible

19/01/21 9:22 AM

β-Secretase

α-Secretase Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain

γ-Secretase

1 11 16 40 42 49

<!-- image -->

generation of the Aβ peptide, and downstream effects on

tau aggregation. The Aβ peptide is produced from the amyloid

precursor protein (APP), a transmembrane protein, via cleavage by two enzymes, β-secretase and γ-secretase. (Cleavage by α-secretase prevents Aβ production.) Presenilin is the active enzymatic component of the γ-secretase complex and cleaves APP at several sites within the membrane to produce Aβ peptides of different lengths such as Aβ38, Aβ40, and Aβ42. Several mutations in APP that are just outside of the Aβ region or within the coding sequence of Aβ cause forms of autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease (AD). The amino acids (blue) in the APP/Aβ amino acid sequence represent the normal amino acids in APP; amino acids in green (below the normal sequence) are those that cause familial AD or cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). Aβ is predominantly produced from APP within endosomes. A variety of molecules and synaptic activity

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1571

P

regulate Aβ levels. There is evidence that Aβ aggregation is

influenced by the Aβ-binding molecules ApoE and clusterin,

which likely interact in the extracellular space of the brain. A

variety of molecules and processes affect Aβ clearance from the interstitial fluid (ISF) that is present in the extracellular space of the brain, including neprilysin and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), as well as cerebral spinal fluid and interstitial fluid bulk flow. LRP1 and RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products) appear to influence Aβ transport across the blood–brain barrier. The concentration and type of Aβ influence aggregation (Aβ42 is more fibrillogenic). Once it aggregates into oligomers and fibrils, it can be directly toxic to cells, induce inflammation, and exacerbate the conversion of soluble tau to aggregated tau through mechanisms that remain unclear. In addition to Aβ, a variety of factors influence tau aggregation and toxicity, including tau levels, sequence, and phosphorylation state. (Abbreviation: AICD, APP intracellular domain.)

19/01/21 9:22 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

for degrading many components of the extracellular

matrix. β-Secretase, called BACE1 (β-site APP cleav-

ing enzyme 1), is a transmembrane protein in central

neurons that is concentrated in synapses. Brain cells derived from mutant mice lacking BACE1 do not produce Aβ peptides, proving that BACE1 is indeed the neuronal β-secretase. γ-Secretase, the most complicated of the three, is actually a multiprotein complex that cleaves several different transmembrane proteins. As would be expected, given its peculiar ability to act within the membrane, γ-secretase itself includes several transmembrane proteins. Two of these are called presenilin-1 and presenilin-2, reflecting their association with AD. Other components of the complex include the transmembrane proteins nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2. Although the biochemical properties of Aβ and APP are interesting, the critical question is whether they have a part in the debilitating symptoms of AD.

these three genes have been found, and the majority

influence cleavage of APP, increasing the production of

Aβ peptides or specifically the proportion of the more

aggregation-prone Aβ42 species. Interestingly, some APP mutations occur within the Aβ sequence itself and do not affect Aβ production but do affect Aβ aggregation and clearance from the brain. Some APP mutations are amino acid substitu -tions flanking the Aβ region. Cells that express a double mutation at the β-secretase cleavage site (the

-so-called Swedish mutation), which is required for Aβ formation, secrete several-fold more Aβ peptide than cells expressing wild type APP. Interestingly, another mutation in APP adjacent to the β-secretase site was recently discovered. This mutation appears to protect against AD by decreasing Aβ production. Yet another APP mutation causes γ-secretase to generate a greater proportion of longer Aβ species, such as Aβ42, in relation to shorter species such as Aβ40. Likewise, in most presenilin mutants the mutant γ-secretase has higher than normal activity or generates peptides with an increased ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40. These human genetic studies offer compelling evidence that (1) cleavage of APP to generate Aβ and the propensity of Aβ to aggregate play key instigating roles

The disease might be caused by Aβ accumulation, but Aβ might itself be a result of another pathological process or even be an innocuous correlate. Genetic evi dence in humans and experimental animals has been critical in demonstrating that APP and, specifically, Aβ play a central role in AD. The first clue came from the observation that the APP gene lies on chromosome 21, which is present in three copies rather than the normal two in people

with Down syndrome (also known as trisomy 21). All people with Down syndrome who live to middle age develop AD pathology and dementia, with onset around 50 years. This association is consistent with the idea that APP predisposes to AD by overproducing APP and Aβ by 50% throughout life. Nevertheless, copies of many genes are present in three copies in individuals with trisomy 21, and initially, it was not clear that triplication of APP in Down syndrome was responsible for AD in this population. Subsequently, rare families were found in which both AD and cer ebral amyloid angiopathy developed in the absence of Down syndrome due to duplication of just the APP locus on human chromosome 21. This is strong evidence that overexpression of APP alone is enough to lead to AD and cerebral amyloid angiopathy. More direct genetic evidence came from analysis of the rare patients with dominantly inherited AD, in whom the onset of symptoms is usually between 30

and 50 years of age. In the late 1980s, several research groups began using methods of molecular cloning to identify the genes mutated in dominantly inherited AD. Remarkably, the first three genes identified were those encoding the proteins APP, presenilin-1, and presenilin-2 (Figure 64–12). Many different mutations in

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1572

-in some cases of dominantly inherited early-onset AD and (2) less Aβ production decreases the risk for lateonset AD. Genetic studies in mice have also strengthened the case that APP cleavage and specifically Aβ aggregation contribute to AD. Transgenic expression or knock-in of mutant APP forms identical to those found in autosomal dominant AD leads to the appearance of amyloid plaques in the hippocampus and cortex, dystrophic neurites in proximity to Aβ deposits, decreased density of synaptic terminals around amyloid plaques, and impairments in synaptic transmission. Several mouse models develop functional abnormalities such as deficits in spatial and episodic-like memory. Alterations are more severe in transgenic mice that express altered forms of both APP and presenilin-1. It is important to note that although these mice do not develop tau aggregation or neurofibrillary tangles, lesions believed to be important in the cognitive decline seen in AD, they remain invaluable models for addressing the mechanistic role of Aβ and related pathology in the pathogenesis of AD, especially the role of Aβ, and for testing potential therapies. Given the strong evidence that APP cleavage is involved in the pathogenesis of AD, the next question is: How does the accumulation of cleavage products

contribute to symptoms and ultimately dementia? There are three sets of cleavage products: the secreted extracellular region (ectodomain), the Aβ peptide, and

19/01/21 9:22 AM


Nongenetic Genetic

A. Environmental and genetic factors. (Abbreviations: APOE

apolipoprotein E; APP, amyloid precursor protein; PS1

,

presenilin-1; PS2, presenilin-2.)

cytoplasmic fragment. Although all three fragments

can have deleterious effects on neurons in experi-

mental animals, the Aβ peptides have received the

most attention, and evidence for their involvement is strongest. There is evidence that different aggregated forms of Aβ such as oligomers, protofibrils, and fibrils can lead to synaptic and neuronal damage that might contribute to AD. Neurofibrillary Tangles Contain MicrotubuleAssociated Proteins

## Until around 2005, most research on the molecular and cellular basis of AD focused on Aβ peptides and amy-

loid plaques, but tau aggregation in neurofibrillary

tangles appears to play a key role in the progression of AD (Figure 64–9). Molecular analysis revealed that these abnormal inclusions in cell bodies and proximal dendrites contain aggregates of hyperphosphorylated isoforms of tau, a microtubule-binding protein that is normally soluble (Figure 64–13). The tau protein plays a key role in intracellular transport, particularly in axons, by binding to and stabilizing microtubules. Impairments in axonal transport compromise synaptic stability and trophic support. While the mechanism by

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1573


<!-- image -->

,

Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain

PS2

(10

mutations)

B. Specific genes involved in early-onset Alzheimer disease

C. Presenilin-1 (a component of the gamma secretase enzyme

- complex) is associated with the APP protein within the plasma membrane.

which aggregation and hyperphosphorylation of tau

lead to toxicity is still not understood, tau accumula-

tion is clearly associated with neuronal degeneration.

Although tangles are a defining feature of AD, it was initially unclear what role tangles and hyperphosphorylated forms of tau play in the pathogenesis of

the disease. Whereas mutations of APP and presenilin genes can lead to AD, no mutations of the tau gene have been found in familial AD. Nevertheless, there is now a great deal of evidence indicating that tau aggregation is a key factor in the neurodegeneration that occurs in AD. First, filamentous deposits of hyperphosphorylated tau are seen in a variety of neurodegenerative disorders, including AD, forms of frontotemporal

dementia, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and CTE. Second, mutations in the tau gene have been found to underlie another form of autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease: frontotemporal dementia with Parkinson disease type 17 (FTPD17). These patients develop tau aggregation together with brain atrophy in specific brain regions in the absence of Aβ deposition. Third, progressive symptoms of AD correlate much better with the number and distribution of tangles than with the amyloid plaques

19/01/21 9:22 AM



Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A Healthy neuron Microtubule Defective microtubule

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 64–13 Formulation of neurofibrillary tangles.

A. In healthy neurons, tau protein associates with normal

microtubules but not as paired helical filaments, and contrib-

utes to the structural integrity of the neuron.

B. In a diseased neuron, the tau protein becomes hyperphosphorylated and loses its association with normal microtubules, which begin to disassemble. It then forms paired helical fila-

ments, which become sequestered in neurofibrillary tangles.

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1574

seen in autopsy. For example, tangles are usually first

evident in neurons of the entorhinal cortex and hip-

pocampus, the likely site of early memory disturbance,

before plaques appear in this area (see Figure 64–16). For many years, controversy raged between those who believe that Aβ is the main causal agent of AD and those who believe that tau-rich tangles play a major

role. These partisans have been called "Baptists" and "Tauists," respectively. Baptists pointed to the fact that during the development of AD pathology, which begins about 15 years before symptom onset, accumulation of neocortical Aβ precedes the development of neocortical tau pathology. More recent evidence suggests, however, that Aβ accumulation appears to somehow drive tau aggregation and spreading in the brain. Thus, Aβ aggregation probably instigates the disease and tau aggregation and spreading likely contribute in a major way to neurodegeneration. For example, transgenic mice that express both mutant APP and mutant tau develop much worse tau pathology. There appears to be interplay between plaques and tangles. Injection of Aβ42 into specific brain regions of transgenic mice that express a mutant tau protein

increases the number of tangles in nearby neurons. Further, a manipulation that reduces the number and size of plaques leads to a decrease in levels of hyperphosphorylated tau. Importantly, recent experiments suggest that Aβ deposition in some way promotes spreading of tau aggregates from one brain region to another, possibly transsynaptically in a prion-like fashion. The details of this process remain to be worked out and are likely to be extremely important. There is now abundant evidence from cell culture and studies in animal models that several proteins that aggregate in neurodegenerative diseases, including tau

and synuclein, can spread from cell to cell in a prion-like manner. This is particularly important as a potential disease mechanism. For example, if the cell-to-cell spreading of misfolded proteins occurs in the extracellular space, this process might be interrupted with antibodies directed against the appropriate disease-associated protein. In fact, this now serves as the basis of several clini -cal trials in humans targeting tau and synuclein. Risk Factors for Alzheimer Disease Have Been Identified

## Very few individuals develop AD because they bear autosomal dominant mutant alleles of the APP or pre-

senilin genes, and these are generally of the early-onset

variety. Hardly any cases of late-onset AD are due to mutations in APP or presenilin genes. Can we, then, predict AD in such individuals?

19/01/21 9:22 AM

The major risk factor is age. The disease is pre-

sent in a vanishingly small fraction of people younger

than age 60 (many of those being autosomal dominant

cases), 1% to 3% of those between ages 60 and 70, 3% to 12% of those between ages 70 and 80, and 25% to 40% of those older than age 85. Knowing that elderly people are prime candidates for AD is of little therapeutic use, however, because modern medicine can do nothing to slow the passage of time. Therefore, there has been intense interest in other factors that affect the incidence of AD. To date, the most significant genetic risk factors discovered for late-onset AD are the alleles of the gene APOE. The ApoE protein is an apolipoprotein. In the

blood, it plays an important role in plasma cholesterol metabolism. It is also expressed at high levels in the brain, most prominently by astrocytes and to some extent by microglia. In the brain, where its normal function has not been clarified, it is secreted as a component of high density-like lipoproteins. In humans, there are three alleles of the APOE gene, APOE2 , APOE4, which differ from each other by at most two amino acids. People with the APOE4 allele are at risk for AD, whereas those with the APOE2 allele are protected against AD relative to people who have the most

Extremely high

(nearly 100%

likelihood)

PSEN1PSEN2

APP

common Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain


APOE3/APOE3 genotype. The APOE4 allele

is present in about 25% of the general population but

present in as many as 60% of those with AD. One copy

of the APOE4 allele increases the risk of AD by about 3.7-fold, and two copies by about 12-fold, relative to someone who is ApoE3/E3 (Figure 64–14). One copy of the APOE2 allele decreases the risk for AD by about 40% relative to being APOE3/APOE3 . The mechanism by which APOE4 predisposes to AD and APOE2 protects against AD is uncertain, but ApoE4 clearly promotes Aβ aggregation by diminish-

ing Aβ clearance and promoting fibrillization (ApoE4 &gt; ApoE3 &gt; ApoE2). It may also act through additional mechanisms such as influencing tau, the innate immune system, cholesterol metabolism, or synaptic plasticity, although these pathways remain to be worked out. A number of other genes and genetic loci influence risk for late-onset AD. Some are common variants that alter risk only slightly, whereas other rarer vari-

APOE3, and ants increase risk to a greater extent (Figure 64–14). For example, relatively rare mutations in the gene TREM2 double or triple the risk for AD, similar to having one copy of the APOE4 allele. This is interesting because TREM2 as well as another gene associated with risk

PTK2B

PICALM

<!-- image -->

association studies (GWAS). Mutations in the three genes that Cytoskeleton/axon development BIN1) that affect common and strong genetic risk factor for Alzheimer disease

, that is present in about 20% to 25% of the population (allele frequency ~15%) is APOE4. One copy of APOE4 increases risk approximately 3.7-fold and two copies increase risk approximately 12-fold relative to people who are homozygous for APOE3. (Adapted, with permission, from Karch and Goate 2015.)

19/01/21 9:22 AM

cause early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (PSEN1 , PSEN2 and APP) are rare but result in Alzheimer disease in virtually 100% of people with these mutations if they live to middle age. There have been a number of common genetic changes found located in regions around or in genes that are relatively

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1575

RIN3

ZCWPW1

BIN1


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

for AD, CD33, are expressed only in microglia. Along

with other emerging cellular and animal model data,

this finding suggests that the innate immune system is

involved in AD pathogenesis. A number of other rare variants that increase risk to varying degrees are under investigation. It seems likely that these developments will ultimately result in a more personalized clinical approach to determining risk for AD, especially as treatments for the disease emerge. Alzheimer Disease Can Now Be Diagnosed

Well but Available Treatments

Are Unsatisfactory

## Diagnosing AD at its earliest stages in the absence of biomarkers can be challenging, as its initial symptoms

can be similar to those of normal age-related cogni-

tive decline or of other related diseases. Nevertheless, diagnosis of mild to moderate dementia due to AD is usually fairly accurate. In fact, during the past few decades, the ability to accurately diagnose the disease has improved, largely because of three factors. First, protocols for physical, neurological, and neuropsychological examination have become more sophisticated and standardized. Second, increased

knowledge of the structural changes revealed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have helped in diagnosing AD at early stages. For example, it is now possible to predict, with approximately 80% accuracy, which patients with MCI will develop AD based on the cortical thinning and ventricular enlargement visible by MRI. These imaging and diagnostic methods also assist in distinguishing dementia syndromes from each other and relating structural to functional defects.

For example, patients with the disease known as

behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia experience

personality changes early on, and MRI at that stage reveals atrophy of the frontal and/or temporal lobes. Likewise, initial difficulties in AD usually center on memory and attention, and MRI reveals initial alterations in the medial temporal cortex and hippocampus. Third, and perhaps most promising, amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles can be visualized by positron emission tomography (PET) using

compounds that avidly bind fibrillar forms of Aβ or aggregated forms of tau. The first of these, Pittsburgh compound B (PIB), binds with high affinity to fibrillar Aβ; its radioactive form, labeled with short-lived isotopes of carbon or fluorine, is readily detected by PET (Figure 64–15). The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved three amyloid imaging agents: florbetapir (Amyvid), flutemetamol (Vizamyl), and florbetaben (Neuraceq). The availability of safe molecular markers of AD allows early stages of the disease to be identified before clinical symptoms are present. Of equal importance,

it allows for improved selection of patients for clinical trials and keener selection of subjects for detailed analyses of normal aging. It is important to note that these changes can also be detected in the cerebrospinal fluid, where the level of Aβ42 drops when amyloid deposition is present and total tau and phosphorylated forms of tau increase with neurodegeneration and tau aggregation. Of course, improved diagnosis of AD is most useful if treatments are available that can halt or slow its progression at an early stage. While we still do not

Normal Alzheimer disease

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 64–15 Positron emission tomography

scans can visualize amyloid plaques in the

living brain. The density of Aβ plaques is indi-

cated by the red regions in these images made after administration of Pittsburgh compound B (PIB), a fluorescent analog of thioflavin T. (Images reproduced, with permission, from R. Buckner.)

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1576

19/01/21 9:22 AM
Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

for AD, CD33, are expressed only in microglia. Along

with other emerging cellular and animal model data,

this finding suggests that the innate immune system is

involved in AD pathogenesis. A number of other rare variants that increase risk to varying degrees are under investigation. It seems likely that these developments will ultimately result in a more personalized clinical approach to determining risk for AD, especially as treatments for the disease emerge. Alzheimer Disease Can Now Be Diagnosed

Well but Available Treatments

Are Unsatisfactory

## Diagnosing AD at its earliest stages in the absence of biomarkers can be challenging, as its initial symptoms

can be similar to those of normal age-related cogni-

tive decline or of other related diseases. Nevertheless, diagnosis of mild to moderate dementia due to AD is usually fairly accurate. In fact, during the past few decades, the ability to accurately diagnose the disease has improved, largely because of three factors. First, protocols for physical, neurological, and neuropsychological examination have become more sophisticated and standardized. Second, increased

knowledge of the structural changes revealed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have helped in diagnosing AD at early stages. For example, it is now possible to predict, with approximately 80% accuracy, which patients with MCI will develop AD based on the cortical thinning and ventricular enlargement visible by MRI. These imaging and diagnostic methods also assist in distinguishing dementia syndromes from each other and relating structural to functional defects.

For example, patients with the disease known as

behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia experience

personality changes early on, and MRI at that stage reveals atrophy of the frontal and/or temporal lobes. Likewise, initial difficulties in AD usually center on memory and attention, and MRI reveals initial alterations in the medial temporal cortex and hippocampus. Third, and perhaps most promising, amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles can be visualized by positron emission tomography (PET) using

compounds that avidly bind fibrillar forms of Aβ or aggregated forms of tau. The first of these, Pittsburgh compound B (PIB), binds with high affinity to fibrillar Aβ; its radioactive form, labeled with short-lived isotopes of carbon or fluorine, is readily detected by PET (Figure 64–15). The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved three amyloid imaging agents: florbetapir (Amyvid), flutemetamol (Vizamyl), and florbetaben (Neuraceq). The availability of safe molecular markers of AD allows early stages of the disease to be identified before clinical symptoms are present. Of equal importance,

it allows for improved selection of patients for clinical trials and keener selection of subjects for detailed analyses of normal aging. It is important to note that these changes can also be detected in the cerebrospinal fluid, where the level of Aβ42 drops when amyloid deposition is present and total tau and phosphorylated forms of tau increase with neurodegeneration and tau aggregation. Of course, improved diagnosis of AD is most useful if treatments are available that can halt or slow its progression at an early stage. While we still do not

Normal Alzheimer disease

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 64–15 Positron emission tomography

scans can visualize amyloid plaques in the

living brain. The density of Aβ plaques is indi-

cated by the red regions in these images made after administration of Pittsburgh compound B (PIB), a fluorescent analog of thioflavin T. (Images reproduced, with permission, from R. Buckner.)

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1576

19/01/21 9:22 AM

have a treatment that delays the onset or slows the

progression of AD, there is hope that we are not too far

off from being able to mitigate symptoms. Although

there is no definitive proof, there is good evidence that a variety of lifestyle factors decrease risk for AD. These include high levels of education, cognitive stimulation, staying socially engaged, regular exercise, not being overweight, and getting appropriate amounts of sleep. Present-day therapies focus on treating associated symptoms such as depression, agitation, sleep disorders, hallucinations, and delusions. One of the principal therapeutic targets to date has been the cholinergic system in the basal forebrain, a region of the brain that is damaged in AD and that

contributes to attention. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors increase levels of acetylcholine by inhibiting its breakdown and represent one of the few drug classes approved by the FDA for treatment of AD. Another drug, the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist memantine, also improves symptoms in individuals with mild to moderate dementia due to AD. It is believed that memantine's action modulates glutamate-mediated neurotransmission. Nevertheless, these drugs exert only a modest effect on cognitive functions and the activities of daily living. Recent advances in our understanding of the cell-biological basis of AD have produced several

Maximum

Figure 64–16 Relationship of biomarker changes to cogni-

tive and clinical changes in Alzheimer disease (AD). In cogni- Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain


promising new therapeutic targets, all of which are

being explored intensively. One approach is to develop

drugs that reduce or modulate the activity of the β- and

γ-secretases that cleave APP to generate Aβ peptides and the associated soluble extracellular and intracellu -lar fragments. In fact, decreasing either β- or γ-secretase levels in transgenic mice that overexpress mutant APP decreases Aβ deposition and, in some cases, functional abnormalities. Accordingly, pharmaceutical companies have developed drugs that decrease or modulate levels of β- and γ-secretases in humans. An obstacle to this

approach is that the secretases also act on substrates other than APP, so decreasing their levels can have deleterious side effects. This is especially true for γ-secretase, whose inhibition has led to toxicity in human trials for AD. There are now several β-secretase inhibitors in clinical trials for AD, and it is likely such drugs will also move into trials for what is called preclinical AD, when AD pathology is accumulating but there is no sign yet of cognitive decline (Figure 64–16). The goal of this therapy would be to delay or prevent the onset of cognitive decline and dementia. Another approach is to decrease levels of Aβ through immunological means. Both immunization with Aβ, which leads to generation of antibodies to

Aβ, and passive transfer of Aβ antibodies have been Amyloid

plaques

<!-- image -->

tively normal people who are going to develop AD dementia, one

of the first physical signs is the initiation of Aβ aggregation in the brain in the form of amyloid plaques. While people are still cognitively normal, amyloid plaques continue to accumulate. At some point, about 5 years before any clear-cut cognitive decline, tau accumulation begins to increase in the neocortex, inflammation and oxidative stress increase, and brain network connections and metabolism begin to decline. Neuronal and synaptic loss and

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1577

Neurobrillary

tangles Severe AD

brain atrophy also begin. This period—when the patient remains

cognitively normal but AD-type pathology is building up—is

termed preclinical AD. Once there is enough neuronal and synap-

tic dysfunction as well as cell loss, very mild dementia and mild cognitive impairment become detectable. At that time, amyloid deposition has almost reached its peak. As dementia worsens to mild, moderate, and severe stages, neurofibrillary tangles form, and neuronal and synaptic dysfunction, inflammation, cell death, and brain atrophy worsen. (Adapted, with permission, from Perrin, Fagan, and Holtzman 2009.)

19/01/21 9:22 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

A Amyloid plaque deposition

Cortex of mouse with mutant APP transgene

<!-- image -->

Cortex of mouse with mutant APP transgene

after Aβ 1-42 immunization APP transgenic mice Normal mice

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 64–17 Immunization with antibodies to the Aβ

peptide clears amyloid plaques and preserves cognitive

performance in mice expressing the peptide. Mice that

develop Aβ deposition in the form of amyloid plaques were immunized with the Aβ peptide. This led to production of antibodies against Aβ . A. Comparison of amyloid plaque deposition in the cerebral cortex of mice overexpressing a mutant APP transgene (APP transgenic mice) that develop amyloid plaques. The mice

<!-- image -->

tested in transgenic mouse models of AD. Both treat-

ments have been shown to reduce levels of Aβ, Aβ

toxicity, and plaques (Figure 64–17). The mechanisms

of enhanced Aβ clearance are not completely clear. Serum antibodies likely serve as a "sink," resulting in Aβ peptides with low molecular weight being cleared more extensively from the brain into the circulation, thus changing the equilibrium of Aβ in different compartments and promoting removal of Aβ from the brain. It is also clear that in the brain several anti-Aβ antibodies bind either soluble or fibrillar Aβ, or both.

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1578


that were immunized with the Aβ peptide have substantially

reduced amyloid plaque deposition. (Adapted from Brody and

Holtzman 2008.)

B. Cognitive performance (a memory test) in two groups of APP transgenic mice. One group was immunized with an irrelevant protein, the other with the Aβ peptide. The mice vaccinated with

Aβ performed at levels close to normal animals, whereas mice immunized with the irrelevant protein showed severe impairment in memory. (Adapted, with permission, from Janus et al. 2000.)

Those that bind to aggregated forms of Aβ can stim-

ulate microglia-mediated phagocytosis to remove

Aβ, although there is also plaque removal that is not

dependent on microglial-mediated phagocytosis. Antibodies to soluble Aβ that enter the brain may decrease soluble Aβ toxicity. These findings suggest that immunotherapeutic strategies may be successful in AD patients, especially if they are given early enough in the disease course, prior to significant neuronal damage and loss. There are multiple human trials underway using active and passive immunotherapies against Aβ both in preclinical and mild AD.

19/01/21 9:22 AM

B Memory task

Mice immunized with irrelevant protein



In addition to targeting Aβ, clinical trials have also

begun targeting tau. This is being done with active

and passive immunization against tau as well as with

small molecules that, in cell culture and animal models, can decrease tau aggregation. A number of studies in animal models have shown that certain anti-tau antibodies can decrease the amount of aggregated, hyperphosphorylated tau in the central nervous system and in some cases improve function. Although tau is predominantly a cytoplasmic protein, one of the reasons that anti-tau antibodies may be having an effect is that, as discussed above, tau aggregates may spread from cell to cell in the extracellular space in a prion-like fashion. It is in this space that an antibody may be able to interact with tau and block this process. Highlights

1.

It is only in the past 50 years that a large per-

centage of the population has lived into the

eighth to tenth decades of life. With this increase,

- neuroscientists have been able to study changes in the brain that occur with normal aging as well as in individuals who develop age-related brain disorders. 2. Subtle changes in a variety of brain functions occur with age, including declines in speed of processing and memory storage and changes in
- sleep. The underlying basis for these changes is likely brain atrophy and loss of white matter integrity. In general, however, there is not a significant decrease in neuronal number that accounts for changes in brain function that occur with normal aging. 3. The changes in cognition that occur in normal aging are not disabling. When memory and often other areas of cognitive function decline more
- than is expected with age such that it is noticeable to others and mildly affects one's day-today life, this syndrome is called mild cognitive impairment (MCI). 4. MCI is not a disease, it is a syndrome. About 50% of individuals with MCI have Alzheimer disease (AD) as the underlying cause of the MCI. Other
- conditions that can cause MCI include depression, cerebrovascular disease, Lewy body disease, metabolic disorders, and drugs, prescribed for other diseases, that cause central nervous system side effects. 5. AD is the most common cause of dementia and manifests as loss of memory and other cognitive abilities sufficient to impair social and

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1579

Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain


occupational functions. AD accounts for about

70% of cases of dementia in the United States,

with the remainder caused primarily by cer-

- ebrovascular disease, Parkinson and Lewy body dementia, and frontotemporal dementia. 6. The pathology of AD is characterized by the accumulation of aggregated forms of two proteins in the brain, the Aβ peptide and tau. Aβ accumu-
- lates in a fibrillar form in extracellular structures called amyloid plaques in the brain parenchyma as well as in the walls of arterioles (where it is called cerebral amyloid angiopathy). Tau accumulates in neurofibrillary tangles in cell bodies and dendrites. 7. In addition to the accumulation of protein aggregates in the Alzheimer brain, marked brain atrophy as well as synaptic and neuronal loss occurs
- as the disease progresses. There is also a strong neuroinflammatory response, especially around amyloid plaques, which involves microglia and astrocytes. 8. The pathology of AD begins about 15 years prior to the onset of cognitive decline or the MCI phase of the disease. Aβ accumulation in the neocortex
- appears to initiate the disease with markedly abnormal levels, followed by the spread of tau aggregates from the medial temporal lobe to other regions of the neocortex. This phase of Alzheimer pathology prior to symptom onset is known as preclinical AD. 9. Significant data suggest that certain aggregated forms of the Aβ peptide lead to synaptic and neuronal damage in the Alzheimer brain, but a much
- better correlate of the cognitive decline is the presence and accumulation of aggregated forms of the tau protein. 10. There are two major forms of AD. The first is a dominantly inherited AD, which accounts for less than 1% of Alzheimer patients and is caused
- by mutations in one of three genes encoding the proteins APP, PS1, and PS2; this form leads to clinical disease onset between the ages of 30 and 50. Genetic, biochemical, and other studies have shown that the genes that cause autosomal dominant AD do so through early accumulation of the Aβ peptide in the brain. The second form, lateonset AD, with an age of onset of 65 years or later, accounts for more than 99% of cases. Although age is the greatest risk factor for late-onset AD, genetics also contribute. The APOE gene is by far the biggest genetic contributor to AD, with the APOE4 variant increasing risk and the APOE2 variant decreasing risk. There are a number of

19/01/21 9:22 AM


Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System

other common genetic variants in other genes

that influence risk. There are also rare variants in

other genes such as TREM2 that increase risk to

- a level similar to that associated with one copy of APOE4. Nonetheless, there is general agreement that major features of pathogenesis are similar in sporadic and familial AD. 11. Besides clinical symptoms and signs of AD, amyloid and tau imaging and cerebrospinal fluid markers can determine that Alzheimer pathol-
- ogy is present in a living person with or without cognitive decline. 12. There are currently only symptomatic therapies for AD that have modest benefit at best. A num ber of potential disease-modifying therapies that

Musiek ES, Holtzman DM. 2015. Three dimensions of the

amyloid hypothesis: time, space and "wingmen." Nat

Neurosci 18:800–806.

- Sanders DW, Kaufman SK, Holmes BB, Diamond MI. 2016. Prions and protein assemblies that convey biological information in health and disease. Neuron 89:433–448.
- References Andrews-Hanna JR, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, et al. 2007. Dis-

ruption of large-scale brain systems in advanced aging.

Neuron 56:924–935.

- -Arias E. 2004. United States Life Tables, 2001. National Vital Statistics Reports, Vol. 52, No. 14. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
- influence the production, clearance, and aggregation of either Aβ or tau are being tested in humans. Although none of these therapies is yet approved, there is hope that over the next several years one or more of these therapies will begin to show a clear benefit.

David M. Holtzman

- Arnold SE, Hyman BT, Flory J, Damasio AR, Van Hoesen GW. 1991. The topographical and neuroanatomical distribution of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in
- the cerebral cortex of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Cereb Cortex 1:103–116. Bard F, Cannon C, Barbour R, et al. 2000. Peripherally administered antibodies against amyloid beta-peptide enter the central nervous system and reduce pathology in a mouse
- model of Alzheimer disease. Nat Med 6:916–919. Bateman RJ, Xiong C, Benzinger TL, et al. 2012. Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 367:795–804.
- Joshua R. Sanes Bishop NA, Lu T, Yankner BA. 2010. Neural mechanisms of ageing and cognitive decline. Nature 464:529–535. Brown-Borg H, Borg K, Meliska C, Bartke A. 1996. Dwarf
- mice and the ageing process. Nature 384:33. Cai H, Wang Y, McCarthy D, et al. 2001. BACE1 is the major
- beta-secretase for generation of A–beta peptides by neurons. Nat Neurosci 4:233–234.
- Choi SH, Kim YH, Hebisch M, et al. 2014. A three-dimensional human neural cell culture model of Alzheimer's disease. Nature 515:274–278.
- Cleary JP, Walsh DM, Hofmeister JJ, et al. 2005. Natural oligomers of the amyloid-beta protein specifically disrupt cognitive function. Nat Neurosci 8:79–84.
- Cohen E, Dillin A. 2008. The insulin paradox: aging, proteotoxicity and neurodegeneration. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:759–767. Corder EH, Saunders AM, Strittmatter WJ, et al. 1993. Gene
- dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer disease in late onset families. Science 261:921–923.
- De Strooper B, Saftig P, Craessaerts K, et al. 1998. Deficiency of presenilin-1 inhibits the normal cleavage of amyloid precursor protein. Nature 391:387–390.
- Dickstein DL, Kabaso D, Rocher AB, Luebke JI, Wearne SL, Hof PR. 2007. Changes in the structural complexity of the aged brain. Aging Cell 6:275–284.
- Fitzpatrick AWP, Falcon B, He S, et al. 2017. Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer's disease. Nature 547:185–190.
- Glenner GG, Wong CW. 1984. Alzheimer's disease: initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein. Biochem Biophys Res
- Commun 120:885–890.

Selected Reading

Brody DL, Holtzman DM. 2008. Active and passive immu-

notherapy for neurodegenerative disorders. Annu Rev

## Neurosci 31:175–193.

- Buckner RL. 2004. Memory and executive function in aging and AD: multiple factors that cause decline and reserve factors that compensate. Neuron 44:195–208.
- Goedert M, Eisenberg DS, Crowther RA. 2017. Propagation of tau aggregates and neurodegeneration. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:189–210.
- Haass C, Selkoe DJ. 2007. Soluble protein oligomers in neurodegeneration: lessons from the Alzheimer's amyloid betapeptide. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:101–112.
- Holtzman DM, Herz J, Bu G. 2012. Apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein E receptors: normal biology and roles in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
- 2:a006312. Holtzman DM, Morris JC, Goate AM. 2011. Alzheimer's disease: the challenge of the second century. Sci Transl Med 3:77sr1.
- Kenyon C. 2005. The plasticity of aging: insights from longlived mutants. Cell 120:449–460.

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1580

19/01/21 9:22 AM

Goate A, Chartier-Harlin MC, Mullan M, et al. 1991. Segre-

gation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor

protein gene with familial Alzheimer's disease. Nature

- 349:704–706. Guerreiro R, Wojtas A, Bras J, et al. 2013. TREM2 variants in Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 368:117–127. Hansson O, Zetterberg H, Buchhave P, Londos E, Blennow
- K, Minthon L. 2006. Association between CSF biomarkers and incipient Alzheimer's disease in patients with mild
- cognitive impairment: a follow-up study. Lancet Neurol 5:228–234. Hebert LE, Scherr PA, Bienias JL, Bennett DA, Evans DA. 2003. Alzheimer disease in the US population: prevalence estimates using the 2000 census. Arch Neurobiol 60:
- 1119–1122. Hekimi S, Guarente L. 2003. Genetics and the specificity of the aging process. Science 299:1351–1354. Hsiao K, Chapman P, Nilsen S, et al. 1996. Correlative mem-
- ory deficits, Aβ elevation, and amyloid plaques in transgenic mice. Science 274:99–102.
- Huttenlocher PR. 2002. Neural Plasticity: The Effects of Environment on the Development of the Cerebral Cortex. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
- Janus C, Pearson J, McLaurin J, et al. 2000. A beta peptide immunization reduces behavioural impairment and plaques in a model of Alzheimer's disease. Nature 408:979–982.
- Johnson KA, Schultz A, Betensky RA, et al. 2016. Tau positron emission tomographic imaging in aging and early Alzheimer disease. Ann Neurol 79:110–119.
- Jonsson T, Atwal JK, Steinberg S, et al. 2007. A mutation in APP protects against Alzheimer's disease and age-related cognitive decline. Nature 488:96–99.
- Kang J, Lemaire HG, Unterbeck A, et al. 1987. The precursor of Alzheimer's disease amyloid A4 protein resembles a cell-surface receptor. Nature 325:733–736.
- Kang JE, Lim MM, Bateman RJ, et al. 2009. Amyloid-beta dynamics are regulated by orexin and the sleep-wake cycle. Science 326:1005–1007.
- Karch CM, Goate AM. 2015. Alzheimer's disease risk genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. Biol Psychiatry 77:43–51.
- Klunk WE, Engler H, Nordberg A, et al. 2004. Imaging brain amyloid in Alzheimer's disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B. Ann Neurol 55:306–319.
- Lesne S, Koh MT, Kotilinek L, et al. 2006. A specific amyloid-beta protein assembly in the brain impairs memory. Nature 440:352–357.
- Levy-Lahad E, Wasco W, Poorkaj P, et al. 1995. Candidate gene for the chromosome 1 familial Alzheimer's disease locus. Science 269:973–977.
- Morgan D, Diamond DM, Gottschall PE, et al. 2000. A beta peptide vaccination prevents memory loss in an animal model of Alzheimer's disease. Nature 408:982–985.

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1581

Chapter 64 / The Aging Brain


Morris JC, McKeel DW Jr, Storandt M, et al. 1991. Very mild

Alzheimer's disease: informant-based clinical, psycho-

metric, and pathologic distinction from normal aging.

- Neurology 41:469–478. Oddo S, Caccamo A, Shepherd JD, et al. 1996. Mediators of long-term memory performance across the life span. Psychol Aging 11:621–637.
- Park DC, Smith AD, Lautenschlager G, et al. 1996. Mediators of long-term memory performance across the life span. Psychol Aging. 11:621–37.
- Perrin RJ, Fagan AM, Holtzman DM. 2009. Multimodal techniques for diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer's disease. Nature 461:916–922.
- Price JL, Davis PB, Morris JC, White DL. 1991. The distribution of tangles, plaques and related immunohistochemical markers in healthy aging and Alzheimer's disease.
- Neurobiol Aging 12:295–312. Rubin EH, Storandt M, Miller JP, et al. 1998. A prospective study of cognitive function and onset of dementia in cognitively healthy elders. Arch Neurol 55:395–401.
- Sanders DW, Kaufman SK, DeVos SL, et al. 2014. Distinct tau prion strains propagate in cells and mice and define different tauopathies. Neuron 82:1271–1278.
- Schenk D, Barbour R, Dunn W, et al. 1999. Immunization with amyloid attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like pathology in the PDAPP mouse. Nature 400:173–177.
- Sevigny J, Chiao P, Bussière T, et al. 2016 The antibody aducanumab reduces Aβ plaques in Alzheimer's disease. Nature 537:50–56.
- Shi Y, Yamada K, Liddelow SA, et al. 2017. ApoE4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Nature 549:523–527.
- Sperling RA, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, et al. 2011. Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's
- Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement 7:280–292. Strehler BL. 1975. Implications of aging research for society. Fed Proc 34:5–8. Valdez G, Tapia JC, Kang H, et al. 2010. Attenuation of age-
- related changes in mouse neuromuscular synapses by caloric restriction and exercise. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
- 107:14863–14868. Van Broeckhoven C, Haan J, Bakker E, et al. 1990. Amyloid beta protein precursor gene and hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis (Dutch). Science 248:1120–1122.
- Yanamandra K, Kfoury N, Jiang H, et al. 2013. Anti-tau antibodies that block tau aggregate seeding in vitro markedly decrease pathology and improve cognition in vivo. Neuron
- 80:402–414. Yi L, Seroude L, Benzer S. 1998. Extended life-span and stress resistance in the Drosophila mutant Methuselah. Science 282:943–946.

19/01/21 9:22 AM

Kandel-Ch64\_1561-1582.indd 1582


19/01/21 9:22 AM

Index

The letters b, f, and t following a page number indicate box, figure, and table.

A responses, 1021t

synaptic transmission by, 1019, 1021,

1022f, 1143, 1146f

biosynthesis of, 360–361 discovery of, 359 enzymatic degradation of, 371 GIRK channel opening by, 315, 316f precursor of, 260t release of, in discrete packets, 260 vasoactive intestinal peptide co-release with, 370 as vesicular transporter, 365, 366f Acetylcholine (ACh) receptors (receptor-channels) all-or-none currents in, 260–261, 261f genetic factors in, 177, 178f, 1196–1197, 1197f genetic mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467 ionotropic GABAA and glycine receptor homology to, 278f, 291 location of, 371 muscarinic, 265, 1021t muscle cell synthesis of, 1190, 1192f in myasthenia gravis, 267, 1434–1435, 1435f at neuromuscular junction, 255, 256f clustering of, 255, 258f, 1194–1196, 1195f, 1197f end-plate potential and. See End-plate potential highlights, 268–269 ionic current through, in end-plate potential, 257–259, 258f–259f molecular properties of, 324–332 high-resolution structure, 267–268, 268f low-resolution structure, 257–258, 257f, 265–267, 265f–266f transmitter binding and changes in, 263–264 vs. voltage-gated action potential channels, 262–263, 264f Na + and K + permeability of, 260–262, 261f, 262b patch-clamp recording of current in, 170b, 170f, 261, 261f

A kinase attachment proteins (AKAPs), 303

a priori knowledge, 387

Aα fibers

conduction velocity in, 412f, 412t in spinal cord, 429, 431f in thermal signal transmission, 424

Absolute refractory period, 220 Abuse, drug. See Drug addiction; Drugs of abuse

Aβ peptides in Alzheimer's disease, 1570–1573, 1571f detection in cerebrospinal fluid, 1576

visual processing pathways for, 501, 503f

| Aα wave, 412f, 413, 413f  Aβ fibers  conduction velocity in, 412f, 412t  in mechanical allodynia, 481  in spinal cord, 429, 431, 431f  to spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f  Aβ wave, 412f, 413, 413f  ABC transporters, 1431f  Abducens nerve (CN VI)  in eye muscle control, 863, 863f, 982  lesions of, 864b, 870  origin in brain stem, 983f  skull exit of, 984f  Abducens nucleus, 989f, 992  Abduction, eye, 861, 861f, 862f, 863t  Abraira, Victoria, 431  Absence seizures, typical. See Typical  absence seizures  Absent-mindedness, 1308  Aβ (amyloid-β), 1569  immunization with antibodies to,  1577–1578, 1578f Accessory facial motor nuclei, 989f, 991 Accessory trigeminal nuclei, 969, 989f Accommodation vergence and, 880  Acetaminophen, on COX3 enzyme, 478  Acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA), 360  Acetylcholine (ACh)  in autonomic system  receptors, 1021t   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1583

nicotinic. See Nicotinic ACh receptors

subunits of, 278f, 1198

Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 366f, 371,


Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, 1435, 1577 Acquired myopathy, 1437

Act, intention to. See Voluntary movement,

as intention to act

ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone), in

depression and stress, 1508, 1508f

Actin

in growth cone, 1163f, 1164, 1165f

molecular forms of, 139

Actin filaments

in cytoskeleton, 139–140

as organelle tracks, 140

in stereocilium, 604–605

Action

control of, 715. See also Sensorimotor

control

selection, in basal ganglia. See Basal

ganglia, action selection in

sensory processing for, 724–725, 725f

Action potential, 211–234

all-or-none nature of, 66f, 67–68, 67t,

211–212

depolarization in, 191, 192b

discovery of, 58f

Hodgkin-Huxley model of, 219–220,

219f

amplitude of, 58, 58f

backpropagating, 296–297, 296f cell excitability in, 65 compound. See Compound action

potential

conduction without decrement in, 212

in dendrites, 292–293, 292f, 295–297,

296f

excitatory inputs on, 68 fundamentals of, 58–59, 58f, 65 highlights, 233–234 inhibitory inputs on, 68

on ion flux balance of resting membrane

potential, 198–199

in monoaminergic neurons, 1001, 1001f

in myelinated nerves, 207–208, 208f


19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Action potential (Cont.):

neuron type and pattern of, 67–68,

229–231, 230f Adaptation, in fMRI studies, 118

Adcock, Alison, 1300

Addiction. See Drug addiction; Drugs of

in nociceptive fibers, 471, 471f. See also Pain nociceptors pattern of, 67 presynaptic. See also Presynaptic terminals with hyperpolarizing afterpotential, 244 on presynaptic Ca 2+ concentration, 329, 330f, 332–333 serotonin on, 353–354 in synaptic delay, 329 in transmitter release, 248–249, 249f, 269 voltage-gated Ca 2+ channel opening in, 248–249 propagation of all-or-none, 58f, 66f, 67–68, 67t axon diameter and myelination on, 207–208, 208f axon size and geometry on, 206–207 electrotonic conduction on, 205–206, 206f voltage-gated ion channels in. See Voltage-gated ion channels, in action potential refractory period after, 212, 219f, 220 in sensory neurons sequence of, 396, 397f timing of, 395–396, 395f in somatosensory information transmission, 426–427 threshold for initiation of, 211, 219–220, 219f Action (intention) tremor, 909 Activating factor, 1324 Activation gate, 218 Active fixation system, 866 Active sensing, 723 Active touch, 436–437 Active transport, 166 primary, 195–198, 197f secondary, 197f, 198 Active zones, 68 in neuromuscular junction, 255, 256f in presynaptic terminals, for Ca 2+ 248–249, 248f, 327–332, 328f of synaptic boutons, 249–250 synaptic vesicles in, 328f, 333–334 Activity-dependent facilitation, 1317, 1320f Actomyosin, 141 AD. See Alzheimer disease (AD) Aδ fibers conduction velocity in, 412f, 412t in fast sharp pain, 472 nociceptors with, 424–425, 425f in spinal cord, 429, 431f to spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f Aδ wave, 412f, 413, 413f ADAM, 1570

influx, abuse Adduction, 861, 862f, 863t Adeno-associated viral vector, in gene therapy, 1428, 1429f Adenohypophysis. See Anterior pituitary gland Adenosine, 364 Adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), 144 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) autonomic functions of, 1019, 1021t in body temperature regulation, 1029b in channel gating, 173 in ion pumps, 166 ionotropic receptors and, 291 from mitochondria, 135 as transmitter, 364 vesicular storage and release of, 371 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) receptorchannels, 278f ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder), 947f, 949 Adhesion molecules central nerve terminal patterning by, 1199–1203, 1201f, 1202f in retinal ganglion synapses, 1184f ADNFLE (autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy), 1467, 1468–1469 Adolescence, synaptic pruning and schizophrenia in, 1494, 1497, 1497f Adrenergic, 359 Adrenergic neurons, location and projections of, 998, 999f Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), in depression and stress, 1508, 1508f Adrian, Edgar on all-or-none action potential in sensory neurons, 395 on functional localization in cortex, 19 on muscle force in motor unit, 744 on sensory fibers, 67 on touch receptors, 416 Affective states. See Emotions Afferent fibers, primary, 409 Afferent neurons, 59 Affordances, 827, 1410b Afterdepolarization, 229 Afterhyperpolarization, 229, 1455 Aggregate-field view, of mental function, 17 Aggressive behavior, hypothalamus in regulation of, 1040–1041 Aging brain, 1561–1580 Alzheimer disease in. See Alzheimer disease cognitive decline in, 1566–1567, 1567f highlights, 1579–1580 lifespan and, 1561, 1562f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1584

lifespan extension research and,

1565–1164

sleep changes in, 1092

structure and function of, 1561–1567 brain shrinkage in, 1562, 1564f cognitive capacities in, 1562, 1563f dendrites and synapses in, 1163f, 1562–1563 insulin and insulin-like growth factors and receptors in, 1564 on motor skills, 1562 mutations extending lifespan in, 1564, 1566f neuron death in, 1563 Agnosia apperceptive, 567, 567f associative, 567, 567f category-specific, 568, 573 definition of, 566, 1473 form, 1480f, 1488 prosopagnosia, 505, 568, 1473, 1477–1478. See also Face recognition spacial, 18 Agonist, in channel opening, 172, 173f Agoraphobia, 1506 Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) aversive activity of, 1038–1039 in energy balance, 1036f–1037f, 1037–1038 Agre, Peter, 167 Agrin, 1194–1196, 1195f Aguayo, Alberto, 1242–1243, 1256 AKAPs (A kinase attachment proteins), 303 Akinesia, 829b, 947f Albin, Roger, 935 Albright, Thomas, 575 Albus, James, 105, 923, 928 Alexander, Garrett, 937 Alien-hand syndrome, 829b Alleles, 31, 52 Allodynia, 472, 481 All-trans retinol (vitamin A), 529 Alpha motor neurons, 764b Alpha waves, EEG, 1450, 1451f α-bungarotoxin. See Bungarotoxin α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, 1036f–1037f, 1037 α-secretase, 1570, 1570f α-subunits, of K + channels, 225, 226f α-synuclein in Lewy bodies, 1555 in Parkinson disease, 141b, 142f, 1548, 1550, 1553 α-tubulin, 139, 140f ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) Alstermark, Bror, 778 Alternatively spliced, 53 Altman, Joseph, 1249 Alzheimer, Alois, 1567 Alzheimer disease (AD), 1567–1579 Aβ peptides in, 1570–1573, 1571f, 1577–1578, 1578f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

altered hippocampal function in, 1367

amyloid plaques in, 141b, 142f,

1569–1570, 1569f, 1570f

cognitive decline and, 1577f PET imaging of, 1576, 1576f toxic peptides in, 1570–1573, 1571f, 1573f APOE gene alleles in, 165f, 1575–1576 basal forebrain in, 1577 brain structure changes in, 1564f, 1568, 1568f cognitive decline in, 1567f diagnosis of, 1576–1579, 1576f in Down syndrome, 1572 early-onset, genes in, 48, 1572, 1573f environmental factors in, 1573f epidemiology of, 1568 highlights, 1579–1580 history of, 1567–1568 memory deficits in, 1567 neurofibrillary tangles in characteristics of, 139, 141b–142b, 142f, 1569f cognitive decline and, 1577f formulation of, 1573, 1574f locations of, 1569–1570, 1570f microtubule-associated proteins in, 1573–1574 reactive astrocytes in, 159 risk factors for, 1574–1576, 1575f signs and symptoms of, 1567–1568 sleep fragmentation in, 1092 tau aggregation in, 141b, 1574, 1579 treatment of, 1577–1579, 1577f, 1578f Amacrine cells, 524f, 536–537, 540 Ambiguous information from somatosensory inputs, on posture and body motion, 897, 898f visual, neural activity with, 1476, 1477f Amblyopia, 1213 American Sign Language (ASL), 19–20 Amines, biogenic, 360t, 361–364. See also specific types Amino acid transmitters, 360t, 364 GABA. See GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) glutamate. See Glutamate glycine. See Glycine Aminoglycoside antibiotics on hair cells, 610 on vestibular function, 647 Amitriptyline, 1514 Amnesia after temporal lobe damage, 1482, 1485 episodic memory recall in, 1299 hysterical (psychogenic), 1485 priming in, 1294, 1295f simulation of, in malingerer, 1485 Amnestic shellfish poisoning, 1466–1467 AMPA receptors Ca 2+ permeability in, 279, 281f contributions to excitatory postsynaptic current, 283–284, 285f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1585

excitatory synaptic action regulation by,

277, 277f

gene families encoding, 278–279

in long-term potentiation in Schaffer collateral pathway, 1344f–1345f, 1345, 1346f postsynaptic density in, 281–283, 282f in seizures, 1455, 1455f in spinal-cord dorsal horn, 479, 482f structure of, 279–281, 280f AMPAfication, 1345–1346, 1346f AMPA-kainate channels desensitization in, 537 in ON and OFF cells, 536 Amphetamines addiction to. See Drug addiction dopamine release by, 376 for narcolepsy, 1095 source and molecular target of, 1072t Amplification signal, in chemical synapses. See Synapse, chemical, signal amplification in of sound, in cochlea, 616–618, 617f, 618f Ampulla, 600f, 631, 633f Amygdala, 1050–1055 anatomy of, 14f in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f, 1539 in autonomic function, 1025–1026, 1026f in drug addiction, 1055 in emotional processing, 978, 1056, 1059 in fear response in animals, 1052–1053, 1052f in humans, 1053–1055, 1054f, 1056, 1057f in freezing behavior, 1050, 1052f lateral and central nuclei in, 1051–1052, 1052f lesions of, facial expression impairment in, 1509, 1510f long-term potentiation in, 1332–1333, 1333f in mentalizing, 1527, 1528f in mood and anxiety disorders, 1055, 1509–1511, 1510f in positive emotions, 1055 in schizophrenia, 1494 in threat conditioning in mammals, 1331–1334, 1331f–1333f, 1335f Amygdaloid nuclei, 12b Amyloid neuropathy, 1433t Amyloid plaques, in Alzheimer disease. See Alzheimer disease (AD), amyloid plaques in Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 1570–1573, 1571f Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) brain-machine interfaces for, 962, 965, 966f genetic factors in, 1426–1427, 1427f, 1428 induced pluripotent stem cells for, 1254, 1254f Index


motor neuron pathophysiology of, 1120,

1426–1428, 1551f

nonneural cell reactions in, 1428

symptoms of, 1426 Amyotrophy, 143 Anaclitic depression, 1212 Analgesia, stimulation-produced, 488. See also Pain, control of Anandamide, 310, 311f, 478 Anarchic-hand syndrome, 829b Anatomical alignment, in fMRI, 116 Anatomical sex, 1261 Andersen, Richard, 587 Androgen receptor 5-α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) receptor, 1264, 1266f dysfunction of, in spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 1555 Androstadienone perception, 1280f, 1281 Anencephaly, 809 Anesthesia dolorosa, 474 Angelman syndrome, 1533–1534, 1533f Angiotensin I (ANGI), 1033 Angiotensin II (ANGII), 1033 Angular gyrus, 17f Angular motion, postural response to, 895–896 Anhedonia, 1503. See also Major depressive disorder Anion, 167 Ankle strategy, 889, 891f Ankyrin G, 1187f Anosmia, 691 Anterior cingulate cortex electrode placement for deep brain stimulation, 1519f in emotional processing, 1049, 1049f, 1056, 1060 in mood and anxiety disorders, 1510f–1511f, 1511 opiates action in, 493 pain control by, 485–486, 487b, 487f Anterior group, thalamic nuclei, 82f, 83 Anterior intraparietal area (AIP) in decision-making, 1404f–1405f in object grasping, 825, 826f–827f, 827 Anterior neural ridge, 1115, 1115f Anterior pituitary gland hormones of, 1027 hypothalamic control of, 1028–1029, 1028f, 1029t Anterograde axonal transport, 143 Anterolateral system, 450f–451f Antibiotics, on hair cells, 609 Antibodies to AMPA receptor in epilepsy, 278 to Aβ peptides, immunization with, 1577–1578, 1578f in myasthenia gravis, 1435 Anticipatory control, 723, 724f

19/01/21 9:18 AM
altered hippocampal function in, 1367

amyloid plaques in, 141b, 142f,

1569–1570, 1569f, 1570f

cognitive decline and, 1577f PET imaging of, 1576, 1576f toxic peptides in, 1570–1573, 1571f, 1573f APOE gene alleles in, 165f, 1575–1576 basal forebrain in, 1577 brain structure changes in, 1564f, 1568, 1568f cognitive decline in, 1567f diagnosis of, 1576–1579, 1576f in Down syndrome, 1572 early-onset, genes in, 48, 1572, 1573f environmental factors in, 1573f epidemiology of, 1568 highlights, 1579–1580 history of, 1567–1568 memory deficits in, 1567 neurofibrillary tangles in characteristics of, 139, 141b–142b, 142f, 1569f cognitive decline and, 1577f formulation of, 1573, 1574f locations of, 1569–1570, 1570f microtubule-associated proteins in, 1573–1574 reactive astrocytes in, 159 risk factors for, 1574–1576, 1575f signs and symptoms of, 1567–1568 sleep fragmentation in, 1092 tau aggregation in, 141b, 1574, 1579 treatment of, 1577–1579, 1577f, 1578f Amacrine cells, 524f, 536–537, 540 Ambiguous information from somatosensory inputs, on posture and body motion, 897, 898f visual, neural activity with, 1476, 1477f Amblyopia, 1213 American Sign Language (ASL), 19–20 Amines, biogenic, 360t, 361–364. See also specific types Amino acid transmitters, 360t, 364 GABA. See GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) glutamate. See Glutamate glycine. See Glycine Aminoglycoside antibiotics on hair cells, 610 on vestibular function, 647 Amitriptyline, 1514 Amnesia after temporal lobe damage, 1482, 1485 episodic memory recall in, 1299 hysterical (psychogenic), 1485 priming in, 1294, 1295f simulation of, in malingerer, 1485 Amnestic shellfish poisoning, 1466–1467 AMPA receptors Ca 2+ permeability in, 279, 281f contributions to excitatory postsynaptic current, 283–284, 285f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1585

excitatory synaptic action regulation by,

277, 277f

gene families encoding, 278–279

in long-term potentiation in Schaffer collateral pathway, 1344f–1345f, 1345, 1346f postsynaptic density in, 281–283, 282f in seizures, 1455, 1455f in spinal-cord dorsal horn, 479, 482f structure of, 279–281, 280f AMPAfication, 1345–1346, 1346f AMPA-kainate channels desensitization in, 537 in ON and OFF cells, 536 Amphetamines addiction to. See Drug addiction dopamine release by, 376 for narcolepsy, 1095 source and molecular target of, 1072t Amplification signal, in chemical synapses. See Synapse, chemical, signal amplification in of sound, in cochlea, 616–618, 617f, 618f Ampulla, 600f, 631, 633f Amygdala, 1050–1055 anatomy of, 14f in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f, 1539 in autonomic function, 1025–1026, 1026f in drug addiction, 1055 in emotional processing, 978, 1056, 1059 in fear response in animals, 1052–1053, 1052f in humans, 1053–1055, 1054f, 1056, 1057f in freezing behavior, 1050, 1052f lateral and central nuclei in, 1051–1052, 1052f lesions of, facial expression impairment in, 1509, 1510f long-term potentiation in, 1332–1333, 1333f in mentalizing, 1527, 1528f in mood and anxiety disorders, 1055, 1509–1511, 1510f in positive emotions, 1055 in schizophrenia, 1494 in threat conditioning in mammals, 1331–1334, 1331f–1333f, 1335f Amygdaloid nuclei, 12b Amyloid neuropathy, 1433t Amyloid plaques, in Alzheimer disease. See Alzheimer disease (AD), amyloid plaques in Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 1570–1573, 1571f Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) brain-machine interfaces for, 962, 965, 966f genetic factors in, 1426–1427, 1427f, 1428 induced pluripotent stem cells for, 1254, 1254f Index


motor neuron pathophysiology of, 1120,

1426–1428, 1551f

nonneural cell reactions in, 1428

symptoms of, 1426 Amyotrophy, 143 Anaclitic depression, 1212 Analgesia, stimulation-produced, 488. See also Pain, control of Anandamide, 310, 311f, 478 Anarchic-hand syndrome, 829b Anatomical alignment, in fMRI, 116 Anatomical sex, 1261 Andersen, Richard, 587 Androgen receptor 5-α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) receptor, 1264, 1266f dysfunction of, in spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 1555 Androstadienone perception, 1280f, 1281 Anencephaly, 809 Anesthesia dolorosa, 474 Angelman syndrome, 1533–1534, 1533f Angiotensin I (ANGI), 1033 Angiotensin II (ANGII), 1033 Angular gyrus, 17f Angular motion, postural response to, 895–896 Anhedonia, 1503. See also Major depressive disorder Anion, 167 Ankle strategy, 889, 891f Ankyrin G, 1187f Anosmia, 691 Anterior cingulate cortex electrode placement for deep brain stimulation, 1519f in emotional processing, 1049, 1049f, 1056, 1060 in mood and anxiety disorders, 1510f–1511f, 1511 opiates action in, 493 pain control by, 485–486, 487b, 487f Anterior group, thalamic nuclei, 82f, 83 Anterior intraparietal area (AIP) in decision-making, 1404f–1405f in object grasping, 825, 826f–827f, 827 Anterior neural ridge, 1115, 1115f Anterior pituitary gland hormones of, 1027 hypothalamic control of, 1028–1029, 1028f, 1029t Anterograde axonal transport, 143 Anterolateral system, 450f–451f Antibiotics, on hair cells, 609 Antibodies to AMPA receptor in epilepsy, 278 to Aβ peptides, immunization with, 1577–1578, 1578f in myasthenia gravis, 1435 Anticipatory control, 723, 724f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Anticipatory postural adjustments.

See also Posture

for disturbance to balance, postural

orientation in, 894–895 learning with practice, 892f before voluntary movement, 892–894, 893f Anticonvulsant drugs for bipolar disorder, 1519–1520 mechanisms of action of, 1461 for seizures, 1448 Antidepressant drugs. See also specific drugs and drug classes anterior cingulate cortex activity and success of, 1511, 1511f ketamine as, 1515 mechanisms of actions of, 1512–1515, 1516f–1517f hypotheses of, 1515 monoamine oxidase in, 1513–1514, 1516f–1517f noradrenergic systems in, 1513–1514, 1516f–1517f serotonergic systems in, 1513, 1513f, 1516f–1517f Antidiuretic hormone. See Vasopressin Antigravity support, 886 Antihistamines drowsiness and, 1007 for insomnia, 1093 Antiporters (exchangers), 186f, 198 Antipsychotic drugs for bipolar disorder, 1520 mechanisms of action of, 1497–1499, 1498f side effects of, 1498–1499 Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) in Huntington disease treatment, 1556–1557 in spinal muscular atrophy treatment, 1428, 1429f Anxiety adaptive, 1504–1505 definition of, 1504 vs. fear, 1504 sources of, 1505 Anxiety disorders, 1504–1506 diagnosis of, 1505 epidemiology of, 1504 fear in, 1504 genetic factors in, 1505 risk factors for, 1505 symptoms of, 1505 syndromes of, 1505–1506 treatment of, 1515, 1518 Aperture problem, 554–555, 556f Aphasia Broca's. See Broca's aphasia classification of, 1378–1379, 1379t conduction. See Conduction aphasia definition of, 16 differential diagnosis of, 1379t, 1384t

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1586

early studies of, 16–18

epidemiology of, 1382

expressive, 13

global. See Global aphasia less common, 1386–1388, 1387f receptive, 13 transcortical motor. See Transcortical motor aphasia transcortical sensory. See Transcortical sensory aphasia Wernicke's. See Wernicke's aphasia Aplysia gill-withdrawal reflex in classical threat conditioning of, 1317, 1319, 1320f long-term habituation of, 1314–1315, 1316f long-term sensitization of, 1319, 1321f short-term habituation of, 1314, 1315f short-term sensitization of, 1316–1317, 1318f–1319f inking response in, 247, 247f long-term synaptic facilitation in, 1327–1328, 1329f synaptic strength in, 1327 Apnea, sleep. See Sleep apnea Apneusis, 997 APOE gene alleles, in Alzheimer disease, 1575–1576, 1575F ApoE protein, 1575 Apoptosis (programmed cell death) of motor neurons, 1147, 1148f vs. necrosis, 1151 in neurodegenerative diseases, 1556, 1557 neurotrophic factors in suppression of, 1149f, 1151–1153, 1151f, 1152f APP (amyloid precursor protein), 1570–1573, 1571f Apperceptive agnosia, 567, 567f Appetite control, afferent signals in, 1034–1037, 1036f–1037f. See also Energy balance, hypothalamic regulation of Arachidonic acid, 310, 311f 2-Arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), 310, 311f Architectonic, 131 Arcuate nucleus anatomy of, 1014f, 1015 in energy balance and hunger drive, 1015, 1033, 1035, 1036f–1037f Area MT, in decision-making, 1398–1400, 1399f, 1400f Area postrema, 994 Area under an ROC curve (AUC), 390b Aristotle, on senses, 385 Arm paralysis, brain-machine interface stimulation in, 965, 967, 969f Aromatase, 1262, 1264f, 1265f Arousal ascending system for. See Ascending arousal system confusional, 1095

monoaminergic and cholinergic neurons

on, 1006–1007, 1007f

Arthritis, nociceptive pain in, 474 Artificial intelligence (AI), 1474–1475 Artificial neural networks, 404–405 ARX, 1469 Ascending arousal system composition of, 1084–1085, 1084f damage to, coma and, 1085 early studies of, 1083, 1084 monoaminergic neurons in, 1005–1006, 1006f, 1085 sleep-promoting pathways of, 1085–1086, 1087f, 1088f Aserinsky, Eugene, 1082 ASL (American Sign Language), 19–20 ASOs. See Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) Asperger, Hans, 1524 Asperger syndrome, 1524. See also Autism spectrum disorders Aspirin on COX enzymes, 478 tinnitus from, 624 Association areas, cortical, 88, 89f Association cortex, 17, 1298–1299, 1299f Associations loosening of, in schizophrenia, 1489b visual, circuits for, 578–579, 579f Associative agnosia, 567, 567f Associative learning, organism biology on, 1307–1308 Associative memory, visual, 578–579, 579f. See also Visual memory Associativity, in long-term potentiation, 1350 Astrocytes activation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 1428 in blood–brain barrier, 159 from radial glial cells, 1131 reactive, 159 structure and function of, 134, 151, 151f in synapse formation, 159, 1205–1207, 1206f in synaptic signaling, 154, 158f, 159 Asymmetric division, in neural progenitor cell proliferation, 1131, 1132f Ataxia in cerebellar disorders, 806, 909, 910f definition of, 909 hypermetria in, 896–897 spinocerebellar. See Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), hereditary ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) ATP receptor-channels, 278f ATP10C deletion, 1533 ATPase, 144 ATP-ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, 149 Atrophy brain, in Alzheimer disease, 1568, 1568f definition of, 1422

19/01/21 9:18 AM

dentatorubropallidoluysian, 1544, 1546,

1547t, 1549t, 1551f

progressive spinal muscular, 1428,

1429f Attention amygdala in, 1056 in object recognition, 560–562 to social stimuli, in autism spectrum disorder, 1527–1528, 1528f as top-down process, cortical connections in, 559 visual lateral intraparietal area in, 591, 874, 874f neural response to, 401, 402f priority map in visual cortex in, 591b–592b, 591f, 592f right parietal lobe lesions and, 589–591, 591f voluntary attention and saccadic eye movements in, 588–589, 590f Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 947f, 949 Attributes, visual, cortical representation of, 559–560, 562f A-type K+ channel, 231, 232f AUC (area under an ROC curve), 390b Auditory activation, in language development, 1381 Auditory cortex central auditory pathways in, 652, 654f, 663f modulation of sensory processing in subcortical auditory areas, 670–671 pitch and harmonics encoding in, 673–674, 674f pitch-selective neurons on, 673–674, 674f primary and secondary areas of, 399, 400f, 668–669, 668f processing streams in, 670, 671f sound-localization pathway from inferior colliculus to, 669–670 specialization for behaviorally relevant features of sound, in bats, 675–677, 676f temporal and rate coding of timevarying sounds in, 671–673, 672f in vocal feedback during speaking, 677, 678f Auditory localization, 1227–1228, 1227f–1229f Auditory processing. See also Sound by the central nervous system, 651–679 central auditory pathways in, 652–653, 654f, 663f cerebral cortex in. See Auditory cortex cochlear nuclei in. See Cochlear nuclei highlights, 679 inferior colliculus in. See Inferior colliculus superior olivary complex in. See Superior olivary complex

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1587

in the cochlea. See Cochlea, auditory

processing in

music recognition and, 652

overall perspective of, 382 sound energy capture by the ear, 573–601, 602f–603f sound source localization and, 652, 653f speech recognition and, 652 Auras, seizure-related, 1449, 1458b–1459b, 1461 Auricle, 599, 599f Autacoids histamine as, 363 vs. neurotransmitters, 359 Autism spectrum disorders, 1523–1541 behavioral criteria for, 1524 brain areas implicated in, 1525, 1525f cognitive abnormalities in lack of behavioral flexibility, 1528 lack of eye preference, 1527–1528, 1529f savant syndrome, 1528–1529, 1530f social communication impairment, 1474, 1525–1527, 1526f–1528f epidemiology of, 1524 genetic factors in copy number variations, 49, 1535, 1536f de novo mutations, 47, 48–49, 1535–1537 genome-wide association studies, 1537 model systems studies of, 1538–1539 neuroligin mutations, 49, 1534–1535 small-effect alleles, 1537 systems biological approaches to, 1537–1538 twin studies of, 28f, 1529–1530 highlights, 1540–1541 history of, 1523 pathophysiology of basic and translation science in, 1540 postmortem and brain tissue studies of, 1539–1540 risk factors in, 1530–1531, 1537 seizure disorders in, 1539 Autobiographical memory, 1367 Autogenic excitation, 766 Autogenic inhibition, 769–770 Automatic postural responses. See also Posture adaptation to changes in requirements for support by, 888–889, 891f somatosensory signals in timing and direction of, 894–895, 895f spinal cord circuits in, 900–901 to unexpected disturbances, 887–888, 887f–889f Automatic stepping, 809 Autonomic system, 1015–1023 cell types of, 1016, 1016f central control of, 1025–1026, 1026f ganglia, cholinergic synaptic transmission in, 313–315, 314f highlights, 1041

Index


monoaminergic pathways in regulation

of, 1002, 1002f–1003f

neurotransmitters and receptors in, 1021t

parasympathetic division of, 1016, 1017f pattern generator neurons in, 992, 994 physiological responses linked to brain by, 1015–1023 acetylcholine and norepinephrine as principal transmitters in, 1019– 1021, 1021t, 1022f enteric ganglia in, 1019, 1020f parasympathetic ganglia in, 1018–1019 preganglionic neurons in, 1016, 1017f, 1018f sympathetic and parasympathetic cooperation in, 1022–1023 sympathetic ganglia in, 1016–1018, 1017f, 1018f visceral motor neurons in, 1015–1016 sympathetic division of, 1016, 1017f visceral sensory information relay in, 1023, 1025f, 1026f Autoreceptors, action of, 359 Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), 1467, 1468–1469 Autosomes, 30–31, 1260 Averaging, spike-triggered, 765 Awareness, urge to act and, 1480–1481. See also Consciousness Awl/auchene hairs, 419, 420f–421f Axelrod, Julius, 375 Axes, of central nervous system, 11b, 11f Axial (axonal) resistance, 202–203, 205, 205f Axo-axonic synapses structure of, 276, 276f, 294f in transmitter release, 351, 353, 354f Axodendritic synapses, 276, 276f, 295f Axon(s), 57–58, 57f, 1156–1179 conductance in, Na + and K + channels in, 233 cytoskeletal structure of, 141, 143f diameter of, 766b, 766t on action potential propagation, 206–207, 206f early development of, 1156–1157 extracellular factors in differentiation of, 1156–1157, 1159f neuronal polarity and cytoskeleton rearrangements in, 1157, 1158f, 1159f ephrins in, 1172–1176, 1174f, 1175f growth cone as sensory transducer and motor structure in. See Growth cone guidance of, molecular cues in, 1166–1167 chemospecificity hypothesis, 1167, 1168f, 1182 location and action of, 1167, 1169f, 1170f–1171f protein-protein interactions in, 1167f, 1169f, 1170f–1171f in retinal ganglion cells, 1167, 1168f stereotropism and resonance in, 1167

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Axon(s) (Cont.):

highlights, 1179

injury of. See Axon injury (axotomy)

myelination of defective, 154, 155b–157b, 155f–157f glial cells in, 152f, 153f, 154 regeneration of. See Axon regeneration retinal ganglion, 1168, 1171–1176 ephrin gradients of inhibitory brain signals in, 1172–1176, 1174f, 1175f growth cone divergence at optic chiasm in, 1171–1172, 1172f, 1173f in sensory fibers, 766b, 766t spinal neural, midline crossing of, 1176–1179 chemoattractant and chemorepellent factors on, 1176–1179, 1178f netrin direction of commissural axons in, 1176, 1177f, 1178f trigger zone of, 231 Axon hillock, 137, 137f Axon injury (axotomy) cell death from, 1248–1249 chromatolytic reaction after, 1237f, 1240 definition of, 1237 degeneration after, 1237–1240, 1237f, 1238f, 1239f highlights, 1256–1257 in postsynaptic neurons, 1240 reactive responses in nearby cells after, 1237f, 1240–1241 regeneration following. See Axon regeneration therapeutic interventions for recovery following, 1248–1256 adult neurogenesis, 1248–1250, 1250f–1251f neurogenesis stimulation, 1254–1255 neuron and neuron progenitor transplantation, 1250, 1252–1254, 1252f, 1253f, 1254f nonneuronal cell/progenitor transplantation, 1255, 1255f restoration of function, 1255–1256, 1256f Axon reflex, 479 Axon regeneration in central vs. peripheral nerves, 1241–1242, 1241f, 1243f in retinal ganglion, 1256, 1256f therapeutic interventions for promotion of environmental factors in, 1243–1244 injury-induced scarring and, 1246, 1246f intrinsic growth program for, 1246–1247, 1247f, 1248f myelin components on neurite outgrowth in, 1244–1338, 1244f, 1245f new connections by intact axons in, 1247–1248, 1249f peripheral nerve transplant for, 1242–1243, 1242f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1588

Axon terminals, 136f, 142

Axonal neuropathies, 1430, 1432f, 1433t

Axonal transport

anterograde, 144, 146f fast, of membranous organelles, 143–146, 146f, 147f fundamentals of, 142–143, 143f membrane trafficking in, 142, 144f in neuroanatomical tracing, 145b, 145f slow, of protein and cytoskeletal elements, 146–147 Axoneme, 606 Axoplasmic flow, 143 Axosomatic synapses, 276, 276f, 295f Axotomy. See Axon injury (axotomy) B

Babinski sign, 1426 Backpropagation, of action potentials, 296–297, 296f, 1457 Bagnall, Richard, 1466

Balance, 884. See also Posture disturbance to, postural orientation in anticipation of, 894–895 in postural control systems integration of sensory information in, 899f, 900, 901f internal models of, 898, 899f spinocerebellum in, 901–902 in upright stance, 884, 885b, 885f vestibular information for, in head movements, 895–897, 896f water, 1031–1033, 1032f Balint syndrome, 874–875 Band-pass behavior, 534b, 535f Barber-pole illusion, 555, 556f Barbiturates, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Barclay, Craig, 1298 Bard, Philip, 19, 1048, 1049f Barlow, Horace, 399 Barnes maze, 1355f Baroceptor reflex, 994, 1023, 1027f Barrels, somatosensory cortex characteristics of, 456, 456b–457b, 456f–457f development of, 1125–1126, 1127f Barrington's nucleus (pontine micturition center), 1023, 1024f Bartlett, Frederic, 1298b, 1308 Basal body, 1137, 1139f Basal forebrain, in Alzheimer disease, 1569, 1577 Basal ganglia action selection in, 941–944 arguments against, 943–944 choosing from competing options and, 941 intrinsic mechanisms for, 943 for motivational, affective, cognitive, and sensorimotor processing, 941–942, 942f neural architecture for, 940f, 942–943

anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 933–935, 933f, 934f

behavioral selection in, 946–947, 947f

connections with external structures,

reentrant loops in, 936f, 937–939 dysfunction of, 710, 947–948, 947f in addiction, 949–950. See also Drug addiction in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 949 in Huntington disease, 948. See also Huntington disease in obsessive-compulsive disorder, 949. See also Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in Parkinson disease, 948. See also Parkinson disease in schizophrenia, 948–949. See also Schizophrenia in Tourette syndrome, 949 evolutionary conservation of, 940–941 functions of, 12b on gaze control, 873–874, 873f highlights, 950–951 internal circuitry of, 935–937, 936f in language, 1388 in learning of sensorimotor skills, 1304 in locomotion, 807–809 neuroactive peptides of, 367t physiological signals in from cerebral cortex, thalamus, and ventral midbrain, 939 disinhibition as final expression of, 940, 940f to ventral midbrain, 939–940 in posture control, 902, 904f reinforcement learning in, 944–946, 945f superior colliculus inhibition by, 873–874, 873f Basal lamina in neuromuscular junction, 255, 256f on presynaptic specialization, 1192, 1193f Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in central neuron neurotransmitter phenotype, 1145, 1145f in neural crest cell migration, 1141, 1143f in neuron and glial cell generation, 1131–1135, 1134f, 1135f in ventral spinal cord patterning, 1119 Basilar membrane, 602f–603f, 603–604 Bassett, Daniella, 1304 Bats, specialized cortical areas for sound features in, 675–677, 676f Bautista, Diana, 425 Bayes' rule, 405 Bayesian inference, 721, 721b Bayliss, William, 167 Bcl-2 proteins, in apoptosis, 1151–1152, 1151f BDNF. See Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Beams, of synaptic vesicles, 349, 350f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Bear, Mark, 1351

Beating neurons, 68

Beck, Aaron, 1473, 1474b

Becker muscular dystrophy, 1437, 1438t, 1440f–1441f Bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BNST) in homosexual and transsexual brains, 1281, 1281f in sexually dimorphic behaviors, 1272 Behavior. See also Cognitive function/ processes; specific types brain and. See Brain, behavior and fMRI of. See Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) genes in. See Gene(s), in behavior nerve cells and. See Neuron(s) neural circuits in mediation of, 4, 62–64. See also Neural circuit(s), computational bases of behavior mediation by; Neural circuit(s), neuroanatomical bases of behavior mediation by neural signals in. See Neuron(s), signaling in selection, in basal ganglia, 946–947, 947f selection disorders. See Basal ganglia, dysfunction of sexually dimorphic. See Sexually dimorphic behaviors unconscious. See Unconscious mental processes Behavior therapy, 1473, 1474b Behavioral observation, subjective reports with, 1483–1485, 1484f Behavioral rules, 835, 836f Békésy, Georg von, 603 Bell, Charles, 390 Bell palsy, 983–984 Bell phenomenon, 993 Bensmaia, Sliman, 444 Benzer, Seymour, 34, 40, 1330 Benzodiazepines, 1072t, 1092. See also Drug addiction Berger, Hans, 1448, 1461 Bergmann glia, 154 Berkeley, George, 387, 497 Bernard, Claude, 8, 1011 Berridge, Kent, 1038 Beta axons, 767 Beta fusimotor system, 767 β 2 -adrenergic receptor, 306f β-amyloid, in Alzheimer disease. See Alzheimer disease, amyloid plaques in β-endorphins, 490, 490t, 491f β-secretase in Alzheimer disease, 141b, 1570, 1571f drugs targeting, 1577 β-site APP cleaning enzyme 1 (BACE1), 1572 β-tubulin, 139, 140f bHLH transcription factors. See Basic helixloop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1589

Bias, 1308

Biased random walks, in decision-making,

1401, 1402f

Bilingual speakers, language processing in, 1378 Binding, of actions and effects, 1480, 1480f Binocular circuits, in visual cortex. See under Visual cortex Binocular disparity, in depth perception, 550, 552f, 553f Binomial distribution, 335b–336b Biogenic amine transmitters, 360t, 361–364. See also specific transmitters Biological learning networks, 103f Bipolar cells, 523, 523f diffuse, 536, 537f midget, 536, 537f parallel pathway in interneuron retinal network in, 524f, 531, 536, 537f in rods, 524f, 540 Bipolar disorder depressive episodes in, 1504 diagnosis of, 1503 manic episodes in, 1503–1504, 1503t onset of, 1504 treatment of, 1519–1520 Bipolar neurons, 59, 60f olfactory. See Olfactory sensory neurons Birds auditory localization in owls, 690, 1227–1228, 1227f–1229f imprinting in learning in, 1211 language learning in, 1371 sexually dimorphic neural circuit on song production in, 1267, 1271f Birthday, neuron, 1137 Bitter taste receptor, 698f–700f, 700–701 BK K + channels, 229 Bladder control, 1023, 1024f Blind sight, 1475 Blind spot, 524, 525f Blindness, change, 562, 1476, 1477, 1479f Bliss, Timothy, 1342 Bliss, Tom, 284 Bloch, Felix, 125 Blocking, of memory, 1308 Blood glucose, on appetite, 1035 Blood osmolarity, 1031 Blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) activity in fMRI, 115, 117f, 118–119. See also Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in resting state in brain areas, 399 Blood pressure baroceptor reflex in regulation of, 1023, 1027f hypothalamus in regulation of, 1013t Blood–brain barrier, 159 Blue cones, 393, 394f BMAL1 protein, 1088–1090, 1089f BMIs. See Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs)

Index


BMPs. See Bone morphogenetic proteins

(BMPs)

BNST. See Bed nucleus of stria terminalis

(BNST) Body, estimation of current status. See State estimation Body movements, cerebellum on. See Cerebellum, movement control by Body temperature, regulation of, 1013t, 1029–1031, 1029b Bois-Reymon, Emil du, 8 BOLD activity. See Blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) activity Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in axon growth and guidance, 1178f characteristics of, 1111 in dorsal neural tube patterning, 1119 in neural crest induction and migration, 1141 in neural induction, 1110–1112, 1111f Bony labyrinth, 630 Border cells, 1361–1362, 1364f Border ownership, 554, 554f Bottom-up processes in high-level visual processing, 578 in motion perception, 555 in visual perception, 560–562 Botulism, 1436–1437 Bounded evidence accumulation, 1401 Bourgeron, Thomas, 1535 Brachium conjunctivum, 911, 912f Brachium pontis, 911, 912f Bradykinin nociceptor sensitization by, 478 on TRP channel, 473f Braille dots, touch receptor responses to, 442, 444, 445f Brain anatomical organization of, 10–16, 12b–15b. See also specific structures atrophy of, in Alzheimer disease, 1568, 1568f behavior and, 7–23 complex processing systems for, 20 cytoarchitectonic method and, 18, 18f elementary processing units in, 21–23 highlights, 23 history of study of, 8–10 localization of processes for. See Cognitive function/processes, localization of mind in, 7 neural circuits in, 7–8. See also Neural circuit(s), computational bases of behavior mediation by; Neural circuit(s), neuroanatomical bases of behavior mediation by views of, 8–10 cellular connectionism, 10 chemical and electrical signaling, 8–9 dualistic, 9 functional localization, 9–10, 9f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Brain, behavior and, views of (Cont.):

holistic, 10, 18

neuron doctrine, 8

motor circuits for saccades in, 868–870

brain stem lesions on, 870

mesencephalic reticular formation in Brightness, context in perception of,

555–558, 557f

Brightness illusion, 540, 541f

British Sign Language, 19–20 Broca, Pierre Paul on language brain studies of, 16, 1291 neural processing, 1378 on visceral brain, 10, 1049–1050 Broca's aphasia characteristics of, 16 differential diagnosis of, 1379t lesion sites and damage in, 1382–1384, 1385f, 1386 spontaneous speech production and repetition in, 1382–1383, 1384t Broca's area, 16, 17f, 1291 damage to, aphasia and. See Broca's aphasia damage to, on signing, 20 language processing and comprehension in, 17, 19 Brodie, Benjamin, 375 Brodmann, Korbinian, 18, 18f, 86–87, 87f, 502 Brodmann's area, 819, 820f, 825 Brown, Sanger, 568 Brown adipose tissue, 1029b Bruchpilot, 349 Brücke, Ernest, 167 Brunger, A.T., 347 Bucy, Paul, 1049 Buffers K + , astrocytes in, 154 spatial, 154 Bulb. See Pons Bulk endocytosis, 151 Bulk retrieval, 343, 343f Bungarotoxin, 255, 257f Burst neurons, in gaze control, 868–870, 869f Bursting neurons in central pattern generators, 792, 796b definition of, 68 firing patterns of, 230f, 232f Bushy cells, 655–656, 658f–659f C C. See Capacitance (C) C fibers conduction velocity in, 412f, 412t in itch, 425 nociceptors with, 425 pain transmission by, 472 polymodal nociceptor signals in, 472 to spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f visceral, in spinal cord, 431, 431f in warm sensation reception, 424 C4 gene, 50 C9orf72 mutations, 1426, 1427t CA1 pyramidal neurons, of hippocampus in explicit memory, 1340, 1341f long-term potentiation in, 1347–1349, 1347f, 1349f

| damage to/lesions of. See also specific types from prolonged seizures, 1465–1466 repair of. See Axon injury (axotomy), therapeutic interventions for treatment of, recent improvements in, 1236 functional principles of connectional specificity, 59 dynamic polarization, 59 signal pathways, 58 functional regions of, 16, 19–20 mind and, 1419–1420 neuroanatomical terms of navigation, 11b overall perspective of, 3–4 signaling in, 165–166 Brain reward circuitry in addiction and drug abuse, 1070–1071, 1070f, 1072f in goal selection, 1066–1068, 1067f Brain stem, 981–1008. See also specific parts anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 982 cranial nerve nuclei in. See Cranial nerve nuclei cranial nerves in, 982–986, 983f. See also Cranial nerves developmental plan of, 986, 986f in emotion, 1048f, 1098 functions of, 977 highlights, 1007–1008 lesions on eye movements, 870–871 on smooth-pursuit eye movements, 878–879 in locomotion, 801–804, 803f, 804f monoaminergic neurons in, 998–1007 in arousal maintenance, 1006–1007, 1007f autonomic regulation and breathing modulation by, 1002, 1002f–1003f cell groups of adrenergic. See Adrenergic neurons cholinergic. See Cholinergic neurons dopaminergic. See Dopaminergic neurons histaminergic. See Histaminergic neurons noradrenergic. See Noradrenergic neurons serotonergic. See Serotonergic neurons/system shared cellular properties of, 1001–1002, 1002f monoaminergic pathways in ascending, 998, 1004–1006, 1005f, 1006f. See also Ascending arousal system motor activity facilitation by, 1004 pain modulation by, 1002, 1004  vertical saccades in, 863f, 870 pontine reticular formation in horizontal saccades in, 868–870, 869f in newborn behavior, 981 posture and, integration of sensory signals for, 901–902 reticular formation of. See Reticular formation Brain stimulation reward, 1066–1068, 1067f Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) on ocular dominance columns, 1223 overexpression, in Rett syndrome, 1532 in pain, 479, 481f receptors for, 1148, 1150f Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs), 953–972 in basic neuroscience research, 968–970 biomedical ethics considerations in, 970–971 highlights, 971–972 motor and communication concepts of, 954–955, 955f prosthetic arms for reaching and grasping in, 965, 967f, 968f stimulation of paralyzed arms in, 965, 967, 969f for using electronic devices, 964–965, 964f movement decoding in, 958–960, 959f, 960f continuous decoding in, 961–962, 962f–963f decoding algorithms for, 959f, 960–961 discrete decoding in, 961, 961f neurotechnology for low-power electronics for signal acquisition, 957–958 measurement of large number of neurons, 957 neural sensors, 956–957, 957f supervisory systems, 958 for restoration of lost capabilities antiseizure devices, 956 cochlear implants, 624, 927f, 954 deep brain stimulation, 956. See also Deep brain stimulation (DBS) in motor and communication functions, 954–955, 955f replacement parts, 956 retinal prostheses, 954 sensory feedback by cortical stimulation for control of, 967–968 Brauer, Jens, 1381 Breathing chemoreceptors in, 995–996, 996f medulla in, 995, 995f movements of, 994–995 pattern generator neurons in, 994–998 serotonergic neurons in, 1002, 1002f–1003f voluntary control of, 997–998   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1590

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Ca

2+

in growth cone, 1164

permeability, in AMPA receptor-channel,

279, 281f residual, 351 synaptotagmin binding of, 347 synaptotagmin of, in exocytosis in synaptic vesicles, 348f–349f Ca 2+ channels classes of, 328f, 329, 331t, 332 high-voltage-activated, 227, 329, 331t, 332 locations of, 329 low-threshold, 796b low-voltage-activated, 331t, 332 in Parkinson disease, 1550 structure of, 329 voltage-dependent, inactivation of, 174, 174f voltage-gated in disease, 332 G protein-coupled receptors on opening of, 315, 316f genetic factors in diversity of, 177, 178f, 225, 227–228, 232f high-voltage activated (HVA), 227 in Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 332, 1436–1437 low-voltage activated (LVA), 227 mutations in, epilepsy and, 1468, 1468f in neuromuscular junction, 255, 256f in seizures, 1455 Ca 2+ concentration on ion channel activity, 229 on synaptic plasticity, 351 in transmitter release, 329, 330f, 351 Ca 2+ influx in long-term potentiation, 1342, 1344f–1345f, 1347 on synaptic plasticity, 351 in transmitter release, 327–332 active zones in, presynaptic terminal, 327–332, 328f Ca 2+ channel classes in, 328f, 329, 331t, 332 dual functions of Ca 2+ in, 327 presynaptic Ca 2+ concentration in, 329, 330f via voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels, 327, 327f Ca 2+ pumps, 197–198, 197f CA2 pyramidal neurons, in social memory, 1360 CA3 pyramidal neurons in explicit memory, 1340, 1341f, 1343f in pattern completion, 1360 in pattern separation, 1359 CAAT box enhancer binding protein, in long-term sensitization (C/EBP), 1321f, 1323, 1324f Cacosmia, 691 Cade, John, 1519 Cadherins in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1591

in hair cell transduction machinery, 611,

612f

in neural crest cells, 1141

Caenorhabditis elegans olfactory mechanisms in, 694–695, 695f, 696f studies of nervous system of, 1151, 1151f CAG trinucleotide repeat diseases dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, 1544, 1546, 1547t, 1549t, 1551f hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias. See Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), hereditary Huntington disease. See Huntington disease mouse models of, 1552–1553 neuronal degeneration and, 1551f spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 1546, 1547t, 1551f, 1552 CAH (congenital adrenal hyperplasia), 1253, 1265t, 1279–1280 CAIS (complete androgen insensitivity syndrome), 1264, 1265t, 1279–1280 Cajal-Retzius cells (neurons), 1138 Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in dorsal root ganglion neurons, 410, 411f in neurogenic inflammation, 479, 480f in pain, 475 release and action of, 371 in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475 Calcium channels. See Ca 2+ channels Calcium ion. See Ca 2+ Calcium sensor, 329 Calcium spike, 327 Calcium-activated K + channels, 229 Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase), 307f, 308, 351 Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), 286f–287f, 1344f–1345f, 1345, 1351 Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII-Asp286), 1351, 1355f Calmodulin (CaM), 174, 174f Calor, 479 Caloric restriction, for lifespan extension, 1566 Calyx of Held, 329, 330f, 661, 662f cAMP (cyclic AMP) in consolidation, 1319 in growth cone, 1164, 1166f in olfactory sensory neurons, 1186f pathway, 303–305 in regeneration of central axons, 1246 signaling, in long-term sensitization, 1319–1323, 1321f, 1322f cAMP recognition element (CRE) in catecholamine production, 362b in long-term sensitization, 1319, 1321f, 1322f cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)

Index


on catecholamine production, 362b

in long-term sensitization, 1319–1323,

1321f, 1322f, 1323

in memory consolidation switch, 1323, 1324f transcription activation by, 317 cAMP response-element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) in long-term sensitization, 1319, 1321f, 1322f transcription activation by, 317 cAMP-CREB pathway, upregulation by drugs of abuse, 1074, 1075f, 1076f cAMP-dependent phosphorylation, in synaptic capture, 1327, 1328f cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). See Protein kinase A (PKA) cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway, in fear conditioning in flies, 1330–1331 Cannabinoid(s), 1072t. See also Drug addiction Cannabinoid receptors, 310 Cannon, Walter B. on fear and rage, 1048, 1049f, 1050f on "fight or flight" response, 1021–1022 on homeostasis, 1011 Cannon-Bard central theory, 1048, 1049f Canonical splice site mutation, 33f Capacitance (C) definition of, 200 membrane, 203–204, 204f Capacitive current (I
c c ), in voltage clamp, 213 Capacitor definition of, 138 leaky, 200 Capgras syndrome, 1478–1479 Capsaicin, on thermal receptors, 424 Capture, synaptic, 1326f, 1327, 1328f Carandini, M., 404 Carbamazepine, mechanism of action of, 1455–1456 Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) chemoreceptors, on breathing, 995, 996f Cardiac muscle, 1421 Cardiotrophin-1, 1146 Carlsson, Arvid, 361, 1498 Caspase in apoptosis, 1152–1153, 1152f in neurodegenerative diseases, 1556, 1557f Cataplexy, 1094–1095 Cataracts, 1212 Catecholamine transmitters dopamine. See Dopamine epinephrine. See Epinephrine neuronal activity on production of, 362b norepinephrine. See Norepinephrine structure and characteristics of, 361–363 Catecholaminergic, 359 Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 375, 1382

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Categorical perception

in behavior simplification, 572–573, 574f

in language learning, 1373

diseases of, 1419–1420. See also specific

diseases

neuroanatomical terms of navigation,

current 11b, 11f Central neuron regeneration. See Axon regeneration Central nucleus, of amygdala, 1052, 1052f Central pattern generators (CPGs) characteristics of, 791–792, 791f flexor and extensor coordination, 793, 794f–795f in humans, 809 left-right coordination, 793, 794f–795f molecular codes of spinal neurons in, 796b neuronal ion channels in, 796b quadrupedal, 793, 794f–795f swimming, 792, 794f–795f Central sensitization, 479, 481, 483f Central sulcus, 16, 17f Central touch system, 450–460 cortical circuitry studies in, 456b–457b, 456f–457f cortical magnification in, 456 somatosensory cortex in columnar organization of, 452, 453f divisions of, 452, 452f neuronal circuits organization, 452, 453f pyramidal neurons in, 452–454, 458f receptive fields in, 457–460, 458f, 459f somatotopic organization of cortical columns in, 454–456, 454f–455f spinal, brain, and thalamic circuits in, 450, 450f–451f "Centrencephalic" hypothesis, of generalized onset seizures, 1139 Centromere, 52 Cephalic flexure, 1112, 1113f Cerebellar ataxia, 909, 910f Cerebellar disorders. See also specific types lesions, on smooth-pursuit eye movements, 878–879, 912, 916, 916f movement and posture abnormalities in, 710, 909, 910f sensory and cognitive effects of, 909–911 Cerebellar glomeruli, 918, 919f Cerebellar hemispheres, 911, 912f Cerebellopontine angle, 984f, 986 Cerebellum, 908–929 anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f, 15f, 911, 912f in autism spectrum disorder, 1528f, 1539 cortical connections of, 911, 913f disorders of/damage to. See Cerebellar disorders excitatory neurons in, 1145 in eye movements, 867f, 878–879, 878f, 912, 916f general computational functions of, 922–923 feedforward sensorimotor control in, 922

Category-specific agnosia, 568, 573 Cation, 167 Caudal, 11b, 11f Caudal ganglionic eminences, neuron migration to cerebral cortex from, 1140, 1140f Caudal spinal cord, 78f Cav channels, 227 Cavernous sinus, 984f, 986 CB1 receptors, 310 CB2 receptors, 310 CBP. See cAMP response-element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) CCK. See Cholecystokinin (CCK) cDNA (complementary DNA), 52 Cell assemblies, memory storage in, 1357–1358, 1358f–1359f Cell body, 57, 57f Cell death, programmed. See Apoptosis Cell death (ced) genes, 1151, 1151f Cell (plasma) membrane. See also specific types conductance in, from voltage-clamp currents, 217–218, 218b, 218f depolarization of, 216, 217f depolarization of, on Na + and K + magnitude and polarity, 217f multiple resting K + channels in, 201 permeability to specific ions, 199 proteins of, synthesis and modification of, 147–149, 148f structure and permeability of, 166–169, 168f–169f Cell surface adhesion, in axon growth and guidance, 1169f Cell theory in brain, 58 origins of, 58 Cellular connectionism, 10, 17 Cellular memory, 351 Cellular motors, in growth cone, 1164, 1165f Center of gaze, retinal, 526 Center of mass center of pressure and, 884, 885b, 885f definition of, 884 postural orientation on location of, 884 Center of pressure, 884, 885b, 885f Center-surround receptive field, 531, 532f Central chemoreceptors, 995–996, 996f Central core, of growth cone, 1163–1165, 1163f Central nervous system anatomical organization of, 12b–14b, 13f cells of, 133–162 choroid plexus, 160–162, 160f ependyma, 160–162, 161f glial cells. See Glial cells highlights, 162 neurons. See Neuron(s)

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1592

integration of sensory inputs and

corollary discharge in, 923

internal model of motor apparatus in,

922–923

timing control in, 923 highlights, 929 inhibitory neurons in, 1145 cerebellar Purkinje cell termination of, 1187, 1187f in locomotion, 806–807 long-term depression in, 1353 microcircuit organization of, 918–922 afferent fiber systems in, information coding by, 918–920, 919f–920f canonical computation in, 920–921, 921f parallel feedforward excitatory and inhibitory pathways, 921 recurrent loops, 921 functionally specialized layers in, 918, 919f motor skill learning in. See Motor skill learning, in cerebellum movement control by. See also Movement, control of coordination with other motor system components, 91, 91f functional longitudinal zones in, 911–917, 914f. See also Cerebrocerebellum; Spinocerebellum; Vestibulocerebellum input and output pathways for, 915f, 916 interposed and dentate nuclei in, 917, 917f sensory input and corollary discharge integration in, 923 vermis in, 916 in neurodevelopmental disorders, 1539 neuronal representations as basis for learning in, 104–105, 104f in orientation and balance, 901–902 in posture, 901–902 in sensorimotor skill learning, 1304 Cerebral cortex anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f, 15f anterior cingulate. See Anterior cingulate cortex auditory processing in. See Auditory cortex in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f, 1539 basal ganglia connections to, 937–939, 938f cerebellar connections to, 911, 913f function of, 12b, 16 hemispheres of, 14f, 15f, 16 insular. See Insular cortex (insula) lobes of, 12b, 13d neuronal migration in layering of, 1135–1138, 1136f–1137f, 1139f organization of, 85–88, 85f–87f in postural control, 905

19/01/21 9:18 AM

receptive fields in, 458f, 459–460, 459f

in sensory information processing,

84–88

ascending and descending pathways for, 75f, 88, 88f, 90f association areas for, 88, 89f cortical area dedicated to, 84–85, 84f feedback pathways for, 403–404 functional areas for, 399, 400f neocortex layers for, 85–87, 85f, 86f, 87f serial and parallel networks for, 402–403, 403f in smooth-pursuit eye movements, 867f, 878–879, 878f specialization in humans and other primates, 1141–1143, 1144f vascular lesions of, 1567 vestibular information in, 645–647, 646f visual processing in. See Visual cortex in voluntary movement, 89, 90f, 91f. See also Primary motor cortex; Voluntary movement Cerebral palsy, 780 Cerebrocerebellum. See also Cerebellum anatomy of, 912f, 917 input and output targets of, 914f, 917 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), production of, 160–162, 161f Cerebrovascular accident (stroke). See Stroke Cerebrovascular disease, dementia in, 1567 Cervical flexure, 1112, 1113f Cervical spinal cord, 13f, 78–79, 78f CF (constant-frequency) component, 675–677, 676f cGMP. See Cyclic GMP (cGMP) cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), 312 CGRP. See Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) Chain migration, 1140, 1140f Change blindness definition of, 562 demonstration of, 1476, 1477, 1479f test for, 588, 590f Changeux, Jean-Pierre, 264 Channel density, 205 Channel gating. See Gating, channel Channel opening, length of, 260 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease disordered myelination in, 156b, 156f genetic and molecular defects in, 1430–1432, 1431f, 1433t infantile, 1433t pathophysiology of, 248 X-linked, 1431f, 1433t Charles Bonnet syndrome, 1476, 1478f Chattering cells, 229, 230f Chemical cage, 329, 330f Chemical driving force, 193, 260 Chemical mutagenesis, 35b

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1593

Chemical synapses/transmission. See

Synapse, chemical

Chemoattraction, in axon growth and

guidance, 1169f, 1176–1179, 1177f, 1178f Chemogenetic methodology, in manipulation of neuronal activity, 99b Chemoreceptors central, on breathing, 995–996, 996f characteristics of, 391f, 392t, 393 dorsal root ganglia neuron axon diameter in, 410–411 graded sensitivity of, 393 Chemorepulsion, in axon growth and guidance, 1169f, 1176–1179, 1178f Chemospecificity hypothesis, 1167, 1168f, 1182 Chesler, Alexander, 427 Chewing, pattern generator neurons on, 994 Cheyne-Stokes respiration, 996, 997f Children major depressive disorder in, 1503 social deprivation and development of, 1211–1212, 1213f Chimeric channels, 176–177 Chloride channels. See Cl -channels Chloride ion (Cl -), active transport of, 135f, 197f, 198 Chlorpromazine, 1498, 1498f Cholecystokinin (CCK) in appetite control, 1034, 1036f–1037f in myenteric plexus, 1020f on vagal nerve, 985 Cholesterol, in steroid hormone biosynthesis, 1262, 1264f Choline acetyltransferase, 1436 Choline transporter (CHT), 366f Cholinergic, 359 Cholinergic neurons in arousal maintenance, 1006–1007, 1007f location and projections of, 360–361, 1000f, 1001 synaptic transmission in, 313–315, 314f Chomsky, Noam, 1373 Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPG), 1245f, 1246 Chondroitinase, 1246 Chordin, 1111f, 1112 Chorea in Huntington disease, 1010t, 1545, 1547t in spinocerebellar ataxia, 1546 Choroid plexus, 160–162, 161f Chromatin, 136f Chromatolytic reaction, 1237f, 1240 Chromosomal sex, 1261–1262, 1262f Chromosomes, 30–31, 31f Chromosomes, sex, 1260 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), 1567 CHT (choline transporter), 366f Chymotrypsin, 368

Index


Cilia, nasal, sensory receptors in, 683–684,

684f

Ciliary neurotrophic factors (CNTFs)

on axon growth, 1246, 1248f in neurotransmitter phenotype switch, 1146, 1146f in sexual differentiation, 1267 Cingulate cortex, 12b, 13f Cingulate gyrus. See Anterior cingulate cortex Cingulate motor area, 831 Circadian rhythm molecular mechanisms of, 41–42, 43f in sleep. See Sleep, circadian rhythms in transcriptional oscillator in, 34, 41–42, 41f–43f Circuit (electrical), short, 201 Circuit plasticity, 1077 Circumvallate papillae, 697, 697f Cirelli, Chiari, 1092 Cl -, active transport of, 135f, 197f, 198 Cl -channels inhibitory actions at synapses and opening of, 289f, 290 mutations in, epilepsy and, 1468f resting, multiple, in cell membrane, 201 selective permeability in, 185–187, 185f structure of, 185, 185f Classical conditioning amygdala in. See Amygdala, in fear response definition of, 1317 fear, 1050–1051, 1052f, 1506, 1509 fundamentals of, 1306 history of, 1306 vs. operant conditioning, 1307 stimuli pairing in, 1306, 1307f threat. See Threat conditioning Classical genetic analysis, 34 Clathrin coats, 150 Clathrin-coated vesicles endocytic traffic in, 149–150 membranes of, 345–346 Clathrin-independent endocytosis, ultrafast, 341 Clathrin-mediated recycling, transmitter, 341, 343f CLC proteins/channels, 179, 185, 185f, 187 ClC-1 channels, 185, 185f Climbing fibers, in cerebellum activity of, on synaptic efficacy of parallel fibers, 924–925, 924f information processing by, 918–919, 920f clock gene/CLOCK protein, 40–41, 42f–43f, 1088–1090, 1089f Clonic movements, 1449 Clonic phase, 1449 Cloning, 52 Clozapine, 1498–1499, 1498f CNF (cuneiform nucleus), 800, 802f CNTFs. See Ciliary neurotrophic factors (CNTFs) CNV. See Copy number variation (CNV)

19/01/21 9:18 AM


CO


Index

chemoreceptors, on breathing, 995,

996f

Coat proteins (coats), 150

Cocaine. See also Drug addiction neural correlates of craving for, 1071, 1073f source and molecular target of, 1072t Cochlea acoustic input distortion by amplification of, 618 anatomy of, 599–600, 599f, 600f auditory processing in, 598–626 cochlear nerve in. See Cochlear nerve evolutionary history of, 620b hair bundles in. See Hair bundles hair cells in. See Hair cells, in auditory processing highlights, 626 mechanical stimuli delivery to receptor cells in, 603–606 basilar membrane in, 602f–603f, 603–604 organ of Corti in, 604–606, 605f–607f sound energy capture in, 600–602 sound on air pressure in, 601, 602f–603f Weber-Fechner law in, 601 sound energy amplification in, 616–618, 617f, 618f Cochlear nerve, 599f, 600f, 621–624 axon responsiveness as tuning curve in, 613f, 622 firing pattern of, 623, 623f information distribution via parallel pathways by, 655 innervation of, 621f, 622–623 stimulus frequency and intensity coding by, 622–624, 623f tonotopic organization by, 655, 656f Cochlear nuclei, 652–657 bushy, stellate, and octopus cells in, 655–656, 658f–659f cochlear nerve and. See Cochlear nerve cochlear nerve fiber innervation of, 655 dorsal features of, 655, 656f fusiform cells in, 657 unpredictable vs. predictable sound processing in, 657 use of spectral cues for sound localization by, 656–657, 658–659f functional columns of, 989f, 990 fusiform cells in, 657, 658f–659f neural pathways via, 652–653, 654f ventral features of, 655, 656f temporal and spectral sound information extraction in, 655–656, 658f–659f Cochlear prosthesis/implant, 624, 625f, 954 Co-contraction, 775 Codon, 33f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1594

Cognitive behavior therapy, 1474b

Cognitive function/processes. See also

Behavior

age-related decline in, 1562, 1563f, 1566–1567, 1567f brain systems for, 20 complex, neural architecture for, 70–71 conscious, neural correlates of, 1474–1476. See also Consciousness definition of, 1473, 1474 disorders of. See Conscious mental process disorders; Neurodevelopmental disorders; Unconscious mental process disorders early experience and, 1211–1212, 1216f emotions and, 1056 history of study of, 1473 impairment of aberrancies in, 1473 from birth, 1473–1474 mild, 1566, 1567f localization of aggregate-field view, 17 aphasia studies in, 16–18 association areas and pathways in, 20 cytoarchitectonic approach to, 18 distributed processing in, 17 evidence for, 19–20 for language processing, 19–20. See also Language processing theory of mass action in, 18–19 as product of interactions between elementary processing units in the brain, 21–23 on visual perception, 560–562 Cognitive maps, 1288 Cognitive psychology, fMRI studies and, 121 Cognitive therapy, 1474, 1474b Cohen, Neal, 1301 Cohen, Stanley, 1147 Coincidence detector, 1319 Cole, Kenneth, 212, 212f. See also Voltageclamp studies Coleman, Douglas, 1035 Color blindness congenital forms of, 538f, 539–539, 539f genes in, 539–540, 539f tests for, 538–539, 538f Color constancy, 1412 Color perception context in, 555–556, 557f graded sensitivity of photoreceptors in, 393–395, 394f Color vision, in cone-selective circuits, 538 Coma, ascending arousal system damage in, 1085 Commissural axons, netrin directing of, 1176, 1177f, 1178f Commissural neurons, 1176 Commitment, neural, 1377 Competence, of cell, 1108

Complement factor C4, in schizophrenia,

1497, 1497f

Complementary DNA (cDNA), 52

Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), 1264, 1265t, 1279–1280 Complex cells, in visual cortex, 548, 549f Complex mutation, 33b Complex partial seizure, 1449. See also Seizure(s), focal onset Complex regional pain syndrome, 474 Compound action potential definition of, 206 in myasthenia gravis, 1434, 1434f by nociceptive fiber class, 471f in peripheral somatosensory nerve fibers, 412–414, 413f, 1425, 1425f Computational module, cortical, 512, 512f Computational network modeling, of locomotor circuits, 809 COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase), 375, 1382 Conan Doyle, Arthur, 1409 Concentration gradients, 193 Conceptual priming, 1303 Conditioned place preference, 1071b Conditioned stimulus (CS), 1050, 1052f, 1306, 1307f Conditioning classical. See Classical conditioning operant, 1306–1307 pseudo-, 1305 threat. See Threat conditioning Conductance ion channel, 171, 171f, 200 membrane, from voltage-clamp currents, 218b, 218f Conduction, saltatory, 152, 153f, 208 Conduction aphasia characteristics of, 18 differential diagnosis of, 1379t posterior language area damage in, 1386 spontaneous speech production and repetition in, 1384, 1384t, 1386 Conduction block, 1430 Conduction velocity compound action potential measurement of, 412, 413f in conduction defect diagnosis, 207 in disease diagnosis, 414 measurement of, 1425, 1425f in myelinated vs. unmyelinated axons, 1430 in peripheral nerve sensory fibers, 410– 414, 412t, 413f Conductive hearing loss, 601 Cone(s) functions of, 525–526 graded sensitivity of, 393, 394f, 526f opsin in, 529 response to light, 391f, 393 structure of, 524, 525f Cone circuit, rod circuit merging with, 524f, 540

19/01/21 9:18 AM
CO


Index

chemoreceptors, on breathing, 995,

996f

Coat proteins (coats), 150

Cocaine. See also Drug addiction neural correlates of craving for, 1071, 1073f source and molecular target of, 1072t Cochlea acoustic input distortion by amplification of, 618 anatomy of, 599–600, 599f, 600f auditory processing in, 598–626 cochlear nerve in. See Cochlear nerve evolutionary history of, 620b hair bundles in. See Hair bundles hair cells in. See Hair cells, in auditory processing highlights, 626 mechanical stimuli delivery to receptor cells in, 603–606 basilar membrane in, 602f–603f, 603–604 organ of Corti in, 604–606, 605f–607f sound energy capture in, 600–602 sound on air pressure in, 601, 602f–603f Weber-Fechner law in, 601 sound energy amplification in, 616–618, 617f, 618f Cochlear nerve, 599f, 600f, 621–624 axon responsiveness as tuning curve in, 613f, 622 firing pattern of, 623, 623f information distribution via parallel pathways by, 655 innervation of, 621f, 622–623 stimulus frequency and intensity coding by, 622–624, 623f tonotopic organization by, 655, 656f Cochlear nuclei, 652–657 bushy, stellate, and octopus cells in, 655–656, 658f–659f cochlear nerve and. See Cochlear nerve cochlear nerve fiber innervation of, 655 dorsal features of, 655, 656f fusiform cells in, 657 unpredictable vs. predictable sound processing in, 657 use of spectral cues for sound localization by, 656–657, 658–659f functional columns of, 989f, 990 fusiform cells in, 657, 658f–659f neural pathways via, 652–653, 654f ventral features of, 655, 656f temporal and spectral sound information extraction in, 655–656, 658f–659f Cochlear prosthesis/implant, 624, 625f, 954 Co-contraction, 775 Codon, 33f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1594

Cognitive behavior therapy, 1474b

Cognitive function/processes. See also

Behavior

age-related decline in, 1562, 1563f, 1566–1567, 1567f brain systems for, 20 complex, neural architecture for, 70–71 conscious, neural correlates of, 1474–1476. See also Consciousness definition of, 1473, 1474 disorders of. See Conscious mental process disorders; Neurodevelopmental disorders; Unconscious mental process disorders early experience and, 1211–1212, 1216f emotions and, 1056 history of study of, 1473 impairment of aberrancies in, 1473 from birth, 1473–1474 mild, 1566, 1567f localization of aggregate-field view, 17 aphasia studies in, 16–18 association areas and pathways in, 20 cytoarchitectonic approach to, 18 distributed processing in, 17 evidence for, 19–20 for language processing, 19–20. See also Language processing theory of mass action in, 18–19 as product of interactions between elementary processing units in the brain, 21–23 on visual perception, 560–562 Cognitive maps, 1288 Cognitive psychology, fMRI studies and, 121 Cognitive therapy, 1474, 1474b Cohen, Neal, 1301 Cohen, Stanley, 1147 Coincidence detector, 1319 Cole, Kenneth, 212, 212f. See also Voltageclamp studies Coleman, Douglas, 1035 Color blindness congenital forms of, 538f, 539–539, 539f genes in, 539–540, 539f tests for, 538–539, 538f Color constancy, 1412 Color perception context in, 555–556, 557f graded sensitivity of photoreceptors in, 393–395, 394f Color vision, in cone-selective circuits, 538 Coma, ascending arousal system damage in, 1085 Commissural axons, netrin directing of, 1176, 1177f, 1178f Commissural neurons, 1176 Commitment, neural, 1377 Competence, of cell, 1108

Complement factor C4, in schizophrenia,

1497, 1497f

Complementary DNA (cDNA), 52

Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), 1264, 1265t, 1279–1280 Complex cells, in visual cortex, 548, 549f Complex mutation, 33b Complex partial seizure, 1449. See also Seizure(s), focal onset Complex regional pain syndrome, 474 Compound action potential definition of, 206 in myasthenia gravis, 1434, 1434f by nociceptive fiber class, 471f in peripheral somatosensory nerve fibers, 412–414, 413f, 1425, 1425f Computational module, cortical, 512, 512f Computational network modeling, of locomotor circuits, 809 COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase), 375, 1382 Conan Doyle, Arthur, 1409 Concentration gradients, 193 Conceptual priming, 1303 Conditioned place preference, 1071b Conditioned stimulus (CS), 1050, 1052f, 1306, 1307f Conditioning classical. See Classical conditioning operant, 1306–1307 pseudo-, 1305 threat. See Threat conditioning Conductance ion channel, 171, 171f, 200 membrane, from voltage-clamp currents, 218b, 218f Conduction, saltatory, 152, 153f, 208 Conduction aphasia characteristics of, 18 differential diagnosis of, 1379t posterior language area damage in, 1386 spontaneous speech production and repetition in, 1384, 1384t, 1386 Conduction block, 1430 Conduction velocity compound action potential measurement of, 412, 413f in conduction defect diagnosis, 207 in disease diagnosis, 414 measurement of, 1425, 1425f in myelinated vs. unmyelinated axons, 1430 in peripheral nerve sensory fibers, 410– 414, 412t, 413f Conductive hearing loss, 601 Cone(s) functions of, 525–526 graded sensitivity of, 393, 394f, 526f opsin in, 529 response to light, 391f, 393 structure of, 524, 525f Cone circuit, rod circuit merging with, 524f, 540

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Confabulation, 1482

Conformational changes, in channel

opening and closing, 172–174,

172f–173f of color and brightness, 555–558, 557f of receptive-field properties, 558

Contextual control, of voluntary behavior, Corbetta, Maurizio, 399

Cornea, 521, 522f

Corneal reflex, 993

Corollary discharge integration with sensory input in cerebellum, 923 in visual perception, 583–585, 586f Coronal plane, of central nervous system, 11b Corpus callosum anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f severance of, effects of, 21–22 in visual processing, 502 Cortex, cerebral. See Cerebral cortex Cortical barrels. See Barrels, somatosensory cortex Cortical computational module, 512, 512f Cortical magnification, 456 Cortical neurons adaptation of, 229, 230f, 231, 232f in auditory processing. See Auditory cortex excitability properties of, 229, 230f, 452–454, 453f origins and migration of, 1138–1140, 1140f receptive fields of, 458f, 459–460, 459f in sleep, 1082, 1083f vibratory response, 448f Cortical plasticity. See Plasticity, cortical Cortical protomap, 1123 Cortico-hippocampal synaptic circuit, 1340, 1341f. See also Hippocampus Corticomotoneuronal cells, 821, 841, 843f, 844 Corticospinal tracts cortical origins of, 819–821, 822f voluntary movement and, 89, 90f, 91f Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) in depression and stress, 1508, 1508f hypothalamus in release of, 1027f, 1028, 1029t Cortisol, in depression and stress, 1508 Costamere, 747, 748f–749f Cotranslational modification, 148 Cotranslational transfer, 147 Cotransporters, 197f, 198. See also specific types Courtship rituals, environmental cues in, 1272 COX enzymes aspirin and NSAIDs on, 478 in pain, 478 CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) device, 1093 CPE (cytoplasmic polyadenylation element), in synaptic terminal synthesis, 1329f CPEB. See Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB) CPGs. See Central pattern generators (CPGs) Craik, Fergus, 1297

19/01/21 9:18 AM

| Confusional arousals, 1095 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 1253, 1265t, 1279–1280 Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, 996 Congenital myasthenia, 1436 Congenital sensory neuropathy, 1433t Connectional specificity, 59 Connexin, 244, 245f Connexin 32, 248 Connexon, 244, 245f Conscious mental process, neural correlates of, 1474–1476 Conscious mental process disorders behavioral observation in, subjective reports with, 1483–1485, 1484f highlights, 1485–1486 history of study of, 1474–1475 neural correlates of consciousness and, 1475–1477 perception in, brain damage on, 1476–1479, 1476f–1479f ambiguous figures in, 1476, 1476f Capgras syndrome in, 1478–1479 change blindness in, 1476, 1477, 1479f hallucinations in, 1476–1477, 1478f prosopagnosia in, 1477–1478 unilateral neglect in, 1475f, 1477 recall of memory in, 1482–1483, 1482f Conscious recall, of memory, 1482–1483, 1482f Consciousness. See also specific aspects components of, 1474 decision-making as lens for understanding, 1412–1415 independent hemispheric circuits in, 21–22 levels of arousal and, 1412 memory and, 1297 neural correlates of, 21–22, 1475–1477 theory of mind and, 1413–1414 Conservation, of genes, 32–34, 34f, 52 Consolidation definition of, 1319 in episodic memory processing, 1297 medial temporal lobe and association cortices in, 1298 non-coding RNA molecules in, 1323, 1324f Constant-frequency (CF) component, 675–677, 676f Constitutive secretion, 150 Contact inhibition, in axon growth and guidance, 1169f contactin associated protein-like 2, 1539 Context modulation of, in visual processing, 513f, 551f on visual perception, 546–547, 555–558  829–831, 830f Continuation, 497, 498f Continuous decoding, of neural activity, 960, 961–962, 962f–963f Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device, 1093 Continuous speech, transitional probabilities for, 1376–1377 Contour illusory, and perceptual fill-in, 545–546, 546f integration of, 545 horizontal connections in, 551f, 559 in visual processing, 547–548, 551f saliency of, 497, 498f horizontal connections in, 551f, 559 visual processing of, 507–508 Contractile force. See Muscle fibers Contractile proteins, in sarcomere, 745–747, 748f–749f Contraction isometric, 749 lengthening, 749, 751f, 757f, 758 shortening, 749, 757f, 758 tetanic, 739–740, 740f twitch, 739–740, 740f, 741f Contraction time, 739, 740f Contraction velocity, 749, 751f, 754–755 Contrast sensitivity spatial, 534b, 535f temporal, 534b, 535f Contrast sensitivity curve, 534b, 535f Control policy, 817f, 818 Convergence of eyes, 867f, 880 of sensory inputs on interneurons, 772–773, 772f of sensory modalities, 488, 489f in transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, 488, 489f Convergent neural circuits, 63, 63f, 102f, 103 Cooperativity, in long-term potentiation, 1349–1350, 1349f Coordination of behavior, neuropeptides in, 44–45 eye-hand, 925, 926f in locomotion, 786–789, 788f, 789f. See also Locomotion motor. See Motor coordination muscle, 755–758, 755f, 756f of stress response, glucocorticoids in, 1275 COPI coats, 150 COPII coats, 150 Copy number variation (CNV) in autism spectrum disorder, 47, 49, 1535, 1536f definition of, 33b, 52   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1595

Index



Index

Craik, Kenneth, 718b

Cramer, William, 359

Cranial nerve nuclei, 986–992

adult, columnar organization of, 987–992, 989f general somatic motor column, 987, 990 general somatic sensory column, 991–992 general visceral motor column, 990–991 special somatic sensory column, 990 special visceral motor column, 991 visceral sensory column in, 990 brain stem developmental plan of, 986–987, 986f in brain stem vs. spinal cord, 992 embryonic, segmental organization of, 987, 988f Cranial nerves, 982–986, 983f. See also specific nerves assessment of, 982 locations and functions of, 982–985 numbering and origins of, 982, 983f reflexes of, mono- and polysynaptic brain stem relays in, 992–994, 993f skull exits of, 982, 984f, 985–986 in somatosensory system, 429 CRE. See cAMP recognition element (CRE) Creatine kinase, 1423t, 1425 CREB. See cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) Cre/loxP system, for gene knockout, 35b–36b, 37f Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 1328 CRH. See Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) Crick, Francis, 1080, 1475 CRISPR, for gene targeting, 36b, 38b, 52 Critical oscillator, 618, 619b Critical periods closing of reason for, 1224 synaptic stabilization in, 1223–1224, 1224f in different brain regionis, 1228–1229, 1230f early postnatal, 1221 in language learning, 1377 reopening in adulthood, 1229–1233 in mammals, 1231–1232 in owls, 1230–1231, 1232f in somatosensory cortex, 1230–1231, 1231f visual circuit reorganization during. See Visual cortex, binocular circuit reorganization during critical period Crocodile tears, 993 Cross bridges, formation of, 747–749, 751f Cross-bridge cycle, 749, 750f Crossed-extension reflex, 771 Cross-talk, 1430

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1596

CS (conditioned stimulus), 1050, 1052f,

1306, 1307f

CSF (cerebrospinal fluid), production of,

160–162, 161f CSPG (chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans), 1245f, 1246 CTE (chronic traumatic encephalopathy), 1567 CTG repeats, in hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias, 1548, 1549t Cues, in addiction, 1068, 1071b, 1073f Cullen, Kathy, 923 Cuneate fascicle, 77f, 81, 450f–451f Cuneate nucleus, 75f, 80f, 81 Cuneiform nucleus (CNF), 800, 802f Cupula, of semicircular canal, 632, 633f Curare as ACh antagonist, 257f on motor neuron death, 1148f Current (I) capacitive, in voltage clamp, 213 direction of, 191 Current sink, 1452b, 1452f Current-voltage relations, in ion channels, 171, 171f Curtis, Howard, 212, 212f Cushing disease, depression and insomnia in, 1508 Cutaneous mechanoreceptors. See also specific types on adjustment to obstacles in stepping, 798–799 in hand, 437–438, 437f, 438t rapidly adapting fibers in. See Rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fibers; Rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fibers slowly adapting fibers in. See Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers; Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers for touch and proprioception, 414–416, 415t, 416f, 417f Cutaneous reflexes, 763f, 770–772 Cutaneous sensation, impaired, 1428 Cuticular plate, 605 Cyclic AMP (cAMP). See cAMP (cyclic AMP) Cyclic GMP (cGMP) actions of, 312 in growth cone, 1164 Cyclic GMP-dependent phosphorylation, 312 Cyclooxygenase enzymes. See COX enzymes Cytoarchitectonic method, 18, 18f Cytochrome gene, 1088–1090, 1089f Cytoplasm, 134 Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE), in synaptic terminal synthesis, 1329f Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB) in local RNA translation, 145–146

in long-term memory formation in fruit

flies, 1331

in long-term synaptic facilitation,

1327–1329, 1329f in threat learning in mammals, 1333–1334 Cytoplasmic resistance, 204–206, 205f Cytoskeleton rearrangements of, in neuronal polarity in axons and dendrites, 1157, 1158f, 1159f structure of, 139–141 Cytosol, 134–135 D d' (discriminability/discrimination index), 389b–390b Dab1, 1138 DAG. See Diacylglycerol (DAG) Dahlstrom, Annica, 998 Dale, Henry, 242, 250, 359 Darwin, Charles on emotional expression, 978, 1045, 1047b on facial expression, 992, 1509 on pattern generators, 994 DAT (dopamine transporter), 366f, 376 DaVinci stereopsis, 554 Daytime sleepiness, 1092, 1095 db/db mice, 1035 DBS. See Deep brain stimulation (DBS) DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) receptors, in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f, 1178f, 1179 de Kooning, William, 1313 Deafness conductive hearing loss, 601 genetic factors in, 611–613, 612f sensorineural hearing loss, 601, 624, 625f sign language processing in, 19–20, 20f Death effector proteins, 1153 Decerebrate preparation, for spinal circuitry studies, 762, 785b, 786f Decision boundaries, in neural activity decoding, 961, 961f Decision rules, 1393–1395, 1401 Decision theory, 389b Decision-making, 1392–1415 cortical neurons in provision of noisy evidence for, 1397–1400, 1399f, 1400f evidence accumulation in speed vs. accuracy of, 1401, 1402f as framework for understanding thought processes, states of knowing, and states of awareness, 1409–1412, 1410b, 1411f highlights, 1414–1415 parietal and prefrontal association neurons as variable in, 1401, 1403–1404, 1404f–1405f perceptual. See Perceptual discriminations/decisions

19/01/21 9:18 AM

in understanding consciousness,

1412–1415

value-based, 1408–1409

Declarative memory. See Memory, explicit Decoding, of movement. See Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs), movement decoding in Decomposition of movement, 909 Decussation, pyramidal, 89 Deep brain stimulation (DBS) for depression, 1518–1519, 1519f principles of, 956 Deep cerebellar nuclei convergence of excitatory and inhibitory pathways in, 921, 921f learning in, 928, 928f in voluntary movements, 917 Deep encoding, 1297 Deep neural networks, 122 Defensive behavior, hypothalamus in regulation of, 1013t, 1021–1022, 1504 Degenerative nervous system disease. See Neurodegenerative diseases Dehydration, 1033 Deiters' cells, 604, 605f, 607f Deiters' nucleus, 636 Deiters' tract, 641f Dejerine, Jules, 10 Dejerine-Roussy syndrome (thalamic pain), 485 Dejerine-Sottas infantile neuropathy, 1431f, 1433f. See also CharcotMarie-Tooth disease del Castillo, José, 260, 327, 333 Delay, in feedback control, 719, 720f Delay eyeblink conditioning, 108 Delay line, 657, 660f–661f Delayed match-to-sample task, 576b, 576f, 1293f Delayed-rectifier K + channel, 313 Delayed-response task, 576b Delta (δ) receptors, opioid, 489, 490, 490t Delta waves, EEG, 1450 ΔFosB, 1074–1075, 1076f Delta-notch signaling, 1134f in neuron and glial cell generation, 1131–1135, 1134f, 1135f Delusions in Capgras syndrome, 1478–1479 definition of, 1474 in depression, 1503 paranoid, 1490 in schizophrenia, 1490 Dementia. See also Alzheimer disease in cerebrovascular disease, 1567 in dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, 1547t in Huntington disease, 1545 in Parkinson disease, 1548, 1550t in spinocerebellar ataxias, 1546

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1597

Dementia praecox, 1489, 1567. See also

Schizophrenia

Demyelinating diseases

central, 154, 155b–157b, 155f–157f peripheral, 1430, 1431f, 1433t. See also Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Demyelination, 208 Dendrites amplification of synaptic input by, 295–297, 296f, 298f anatomy of, 57, 57f dopamine release from, 367 early development of, 1156–1161 branching in, 1157, 1160f, 1162f extracellular factors in, 1157, 1159f intrinsic and extrinsic factors in, 1157, 1160–1161, 1160f, 1161f, 1162f neuronal polarity and cytoskeleton rearrangements in, 1157f, 1158f, 1159f growth cone as sensory transducer and motor structure in. See Growth cone protein and organelle transport along. See Axonal transport structure of, 136f, 137, 137f, 138f trigger zones in, 292–293, 292f voltage-gated ion channels in, 231, 233 Dendritic spines, 1157, 1160f definition of, 1221 density loss age-related, 1563, 1565f in schizophrenia, 1494, 1496f excitatory inputs on, 297, 298f motility and number of, on visual cortex, 1221, 1222f plasticity of, 1221, 1222f proteins, ribosomes, and mRNA location in, 146, 147f structure of, 137, 137f types of, 138f Denervation supersensitivity, 1196, 1197f Dentate gyrus, of hippocampus long-term potentiation at, 1342 neurogenesis in, 1249, 1250f, 1359–1360, 1512 pattern separation in, 1359–1360 Dentate nucleus in agonist/antagonist activation in rapid movements, 917, 917f anatomy of, 14f, 911, 912f Dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, 1544, 1546, 1547t, 1549t, 1551f Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). See DNA Dependence, 1072. See also Drug addiction Dephosphorylation, 149 Depolarization axon, 133 membrane on action potential duration, 219–220, 219f definition of, 65, 191

Index


on Na

+

and K

+

current magnitude and

polarity, 216, 217f

recording of, 192b, 192f

+

prolonged, on K + and Na channels, 217–219, 219f Depression anaclitic, 1212 anterior cingulate cortex in, 1060 in bipolar disorder, 1504. See also Bipolar disorder of eye, 861, 861f, 863t homosynaptic, 1314 major. See Major depressive disorder synaptic, 350, 352f–353f Deprivation social, 1211–1212, 1213f visual, 1213–1215, 1214f–1215f Depth perception. See Visual processing, intermediate-level, depth perception in Dermatomes, 429, 430f Dermatomyositis, 1437 Descartes, René, 9, 387, 1340 Descending axons and pathways lateral corticospinal, 89, 90f monoaminergic pathways, in pain control, 488–489, 489f spinal cord axons, 77f, 78 Descending vestibular nucleus, 636, 637f. See also Vestibular nuclei Desensitization, 173 Designer genes, 39b, 39f Desipramine, 1514, 1516f–1517f Desmin, 747, 748f–749f Detwiler, Samuel, 1147 Deuteranomaly, 539 Deuteranopia, 539 DHT (5-α-dihydrotestosterone), 1263, 1264f DHT (5-α-dihydrotestosterone) receptor, 1264, 1266f Diabetic neuropathy, compound action potential in, 414 Diacylglycerol (DAG) from phospholipase C hydrolysis of phospholipids in, 305–308, 307f in synaptic plasticity, 351 Diagnosis, 1489. See also specific disorders Diameter of axons. See Axon(s), diameter of of neurons. See Neuron(s), diameter of Diaschisis, 21 Diazepam, on channel gating, 174 DiCarlo, James, 404–405 Dichromacy, 539 Diencephalon, 12b, 13f, 15f Differentiation, of neurons. See Neuron(s), differentiation of Diffuse bipolar cell, 536, 537f Diffusion, of transmitters from synaptic cleft, 371 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), in language development studies, 1371, 1380–1381, 1382

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

DiGeorge (velocardiofacial) syndrome, 48,


5-α-Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 1263,

1264f 5-α-Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) receptor, 1264, 1266f Diploid, 30 Diplopia, extraocular muscle lesions in, 864b Direct channel gating, 250–251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also Second messengers Direct G-protein gating, steps of, 305 Direct perception, 1410b Direction-sensitive neurons, 460, 461f Directly gated synaptic transmission. See end-plate); Neuromuscular junction (NMJ Direct-matching hypothesis, 838 Discrete decoding, of neural activity, 960, 961, 961f Discriminability/discrimination index (d'), 389b–390b Dishabituation, 1305–1306, 1316 Disinhibition, in basal ganglia, 940, 940f Dissociated state, 1485 Dissociation constant, 171 Distortion, in memory, 1308 Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions, 618 Distributed code, 518 Distributed processing, 17 Distributed settling point model, of homeostasis, 1012f, 1013 Disulfide linkages, in protein modification, 147–148 Divergence, of eyes, 867f, 880 Divergent neural circuits, 63, 63f, 102f, 103 Dlx1, 1140, 1145 Dlx2, 1140, 1145 DMD gene mutations, 1437, 1440f–1441f DNA complementary, 52 mitochondrial, 31 structure of, 27, 29f transcription and translation of, 27, 30f Dodge, Raymond, 866 Dok-7, 1195f, 1196 Doll's eye movements, 993 Dominant hemisphere, 16 Dominant mutations, 32 Domoic acid, in amnestic shellfish poisoning, 1466–1467 Dopamine catechol-O-methyltransferase on, 375 glutamate co-release with, 371 intracellular signaling pathways activated by, 1076f as learning signal, 1068–1069, 1069f modulatory action on pyloric circuit neurons, 320, 321f in parkinsonism, deficiency of, 70 in place field mapping, 1367

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1598

precursor of, 360t

release from dendrites, 367

release through nonexocytotic

mechanism, 376 replacement therapy, for Parkinson disease, 1556 in schizophrenia, 1499 synthesis of, 361, 1513 Dopamine transporter (DAT), 366f, 376 Dopaminergic neurons in basal ganglia, 935 in brain stimulation reward, 977, 1067f, 1068 error in reward prediction by, 122, 1068, 1069f fMRI studies of, 122 location and projections of, 998, 1000f Dopaminergic system antipsychotic drugs on, 1497–1499, 1498f in motivational state and learning, 977 Doppler-shifted constant-frequency (DSCF) area, in bats, 675, 676f Dorsal column–medial lemniscal system, 74, 75f, 450f–451f Dorsal columns, spinal cord, 76, 77f Dorsal horn (spinal cord) anatomy of, 76, 77f, 79 enhanced excitability of, in hyperalgesia, 481, 482f, 486f microglia activation in, 481, 484f neuropeptides and receptors in, 476, 477f, 478f pain signal transmission to lamina of, 474–476, 475f, 476f touch and pain fiber projections to, 429–430, 431f Dorsal motor vagal nucleus, 989f, 991 Dorsal pathways, cerebral cortex. See Visual pathway Dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) anatomy of, 819, 820f in applying rules that govern behavior, 832f, 833, 835, 836f in planning sensory-guided arm movement, 831–833, 832f–834f Dorsal respiratory group, 995 Dorsal root, 77f Dorsal root ganglia cell body of, 409, 410f central axon terminals of, 81 neurons of axon diameter of, 410–412 cell body of, 409, 410f primary sensory, 79, 79f, 81, 409–410, 410f properties and structure of, 136f, 410, 411f in transmission of somatosensory information, 79–81, 80f–81f, 426–427, 428f–429f Dorsal root ganglion cell, 136f Dorsal stream, 12b Dorsal visual pathways. See Visual pathways, dorsal Dorsal-ventral axis, of central nervous system, 11b, 11f Dorsoventral patterning, of neural tube. See Neural tube development Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 1419, 1449 Dostrovsky, John, 1360 doublecortin mutant, 1136f–1137f, 1138, 1469 Double-step task, 584, 584f Down syndrome, Alzheimer disease in, 1572 Dreams, 1080. See also Sleep acting out of, 1095 in REM and non-REM sleep, 1082, 1086, 1088f Drift-diffusion process, in decision-making, 1401, 1402f Drive reduction theory, 1038–1039, 1039f Driving force chemical, 193 electrical, 193 electrochemical, 195, 201 in ion flux, 195 Drosophila. See Fruit fly (Drosophila) Drug addiction, 1069–1079. See also Drugs of abuse animal models of, 1071b basal ganglia dysfunction in, 947f, 949–950 brain reward circuitry in, 1055, 1069–1070, 1070f cellular and circuit adaptations in, 1075–1077 circuit plasticity, 1077 synaptic plasticity, 1075, 1077 whole-cell plasticity, 1077 definition of, 1069–1070 genetic factors in, 1072 highlights, 1078–1079 molecular adaptations in brain reward regions in, 1074 induction of ΔFosB, 1074–1075, 1076f upregulation of cAMP-CREB pathway, 1074, 1075f, 1076f vs. natural addictions, 1077–1078 Drugs of abuse. See also specific drugs behavioral adaptions from repeated exposure to, 1071–1074 classes of, 1072t neurotransmitter receptors, transporters, and ion channel targets of, 1070–1071, 1073f DSCF (Doppler-shifted constant-frequency) area, in bats, 675, 676f DTI (diffusion tensor imaging), in language development studies, 1371, 1380–1381 Dualistic view, of brain, 9 Dual-stream model, of language processing, 1379–1380, 1380f Duchateau, Jacques, 741 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 1436–1439, 1438t, 1440f–1441f Ductus reuniens, 630f, 631

19/01/21 9:18 AM

dumb gene, 1330

Dynamic polarization

law of, 1156–1157

principle of, 59, 64f Dyneins, 144–145 Dynorphin gene, 490 Dynorphins in endogenous pain control, 490, 490t, 491f glutamate co-release with, 371 Dysarthria in progressive bulbar palsy, 1428 in spinocerebellar ataxias, 1546, 1547t Dysdiadochokinesia, 909, 910f Dysesthesias, 485 Dysferlin mutation, 1438t, 1439, 1442f Dyskinesia, levodopa-induced, 1556 Dyslexia, 1474 Dysmetria, 909, 910f Dysphagia, 1433 Dyspnea, 998 Dystrophin, 1437, 1440f–1441f Dystrophin-glycoprotein complex, 747 E E (electromotive force), 200, 200f

inner, 599–600, 599f. See also Cochlea middle, 599, 599f sound energy capture by, 573–601, 602f–603f Ear disorders. See Deafness; Hearing loss Ebert, Thomas, 1336 Eccentricity, of receptive fields, 506–507, 509f Eccles, John on EPSP in spinal motor cells, 277, 777 on IPSP in spinal motor neurons, 288 on synaptic transmission, 242, 274 Echo planar imaging (EPI), in fMRI, 114–115 Echolocation, in bats, 675, 676f ECoG (electrocorticography), 956, 957f Economo, Constantin von, 1083 ECT (electroconvulsive therapy), for depression, 1518 Ectoderm bone morphogenetic proteins on, 1111f, 1112 induction factors on, 1108 in neural tube development, 1108, 1109f Ectodomain, 1572 Edge response, 531, 532f Edin, Benoni, 444 Edinger-Westphal nucleus columns of, 989f, 991 in pupillary reflex and accommodation, 503f, 992–993, 993f Edrophonium, in myasthenia gravis, 1433, 1433f Edwards, Robert, 365

| Ear. See also Auditory processing  external, 599, 599f   |
|----------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1599

EEG. See Electroencephalogram (EEG)

Efference copy, 436

Efferent neurons, 59

Efficacy, synaptic, 337 Efficient coding, 399 Egg-laying hormone (ELH), 368, 373f Ehrlich, Paul, 8, 250 Eichenbaum, Howard, 1301 Eichler, Evan, 1382 Eicosanoids, 310 Eimas, Peter, 1373 Eisenman, George, 169 E K (K + equilibrium potential), 193, 194f Elbert, Thomas, 1336 Elderly. See Aging brain Electric ray, 257f Electrical circuit, equivalent. See Equivalent circuit Electrical driving force, 193 Electrical signals, transient, 190. See also specific types Electrical synapses. See Synapse, electrical Electrical transmission. See Synapse, electrical Electrochemical driving force, 195, 201 Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), for depression, 1518 Electrocorticography (ECoG), 956, 957f Electroencephalogram (EEG) cellular mechanisms of rhythms during sleep, 1083f desynchronization of, 1450 frequencies of, 1450 fundamentals of, 1450 individual nerve cell contributions to, 1452b–1453b, 1452f, 1453f in language development studies, 1370, 1381 normal, awake, 1450, 1451f for seizure focus localization, 1450, 1454, 1454f, 1463 in sleep, 1081–1082, 1081f, 1083f surface, 1450, 1453b, 1453f in typical absence seizure, 1461, 1462f Electroencephalogram (EEG) cap, 956, 957f Electrogenic pump, 195 Electrolytes, hypothalamus in regulation of, 1013t Electromotive force (E) , 200, 200f Electromyography (EMG) motor units and muscle contractions in, 738–739 in myopathic vs. neurogenic disease, 1423–1424, 1423t, 1424f Electrotonic conduction/transmission in action potential propagation, 205–206, 206f in electrical synapses, 244 length constant and, 205 membrane and cytoplasmic resistance on, 204–205, 204f Electrotonic potentials, 191

Index

Elementary processing units, in brain,

21–23

Elevation, eye, 861, 863t

ELH (egg-laying hormone), 368, 373f Elliott, Thomas Renton, 358 Ellis, Albert, 1473, 1474b Ellis, Haydn, 1478–1479 ELN gene, 1532 Embryo cranial nerve nuclei organization in, 987, 988f gonadal differentiation in, 1261–1262, 1262f Embryogenesis, sex hormones in, 1260–1261 Embryonic stem cells, 1252–1253, 1252f EMG. See Electromyography (EMG) Emotions, 1045–1064 amygdala in. See Amygdala on cognitive processes, 1056 cortical areas in processing of, 1058–1059, 1058b definition of, 1045 evolutionary conservation of, 1045 facial expression of, 994 fMRI in studies of, 1059–1060, 1061f highlights, 1062–1063 history of study of, 1049f homeostasis and, 1062 measurement of, 1046b–1047b, 1046t neural circuitry of, early studies of, 1047–1050, 1048f, 1049f, 1050f overall perspective of, 977–979 positive, 1055 stimuli triggering, 1046 updating through extinction and regulation, 1055–1056 Emx2, in forebrain patterning, 1123, 1126f En1, 1114 Encephalitis, anti-NMDA receptor, 287 Encephalitis lethargica, 1083 Encoding of complex visual stimuli in inferior temporal cortex, 568, 568f in episodic memory processing, 1297 in olfactory sensory neurons. See Olfactory sensory neurons of pitch and harmonics, in auditory cortex, 673–674, 674f spike train, 395, 395f of visual events, medial temporal lobe in, 1298, 1299f End-inhibition, 549, 550f Endocannabinoids, 310, 311f, 360t Endocytic traffic, 150–151 Endocytosis bulk, 151 receptor-mediated, 151 in transmitter recycling, 337–338, 339f ultrafast clarithin-independent, 341

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Index

Endoderm

embryogenesis of, 1108, 1109f

signals from, in neural plate patterning,

1112–1113, 1114f Endolymph, 604, 606f, 630f, 631 Endoplasmic reticulum protein synthesis and modification in, 147–149, 148f rough, 135–137, 136f smooth, 135, 136f, 137, 137f Endosomes, 135, 136f, 1151 End-plate. See Neuromuscular junction (NMJ, end-plate) End-plate current calculation of, from equivalent circuit, 269–271, 269f–270f end-plate potential and, 259–260, 259f factors in, 262, 263f End-plate potential, 255, 332–333 end-plate current and, 259–260, 259f generation of, 258–260 isolation of, 257, 257f–258f local change in membrane permeability and, 255, 257 miniature, 332–333 "miniature," 260 in myasthenia, 1434f, 1436 normal, 1434, 1434f reversal potential of, 261, 261f, 262b Energy balance, hypothalamic regulation of, 1013t, 1033 afferent signals in appetite control, 1034–1037, 1036f–1037f dysregulation in obesity, 1034 fat storage in, 1033–1034 intake and energy expenditure matching, 1034 psychologic concepts and, 1038–1039, 1039f Enhancers, 29, 30f Enkephalins, 477f, 490, 490t, 491f Enteric ganglia, 1019, 1020f Entorhinal cortex anatomy of, 14f in hippocampal spatial map, 1361–1365, 1362f–1364f long-term potentiation in, 1342 Environmental changes, in sensorimotor control, 715 Enzymatic degradation, of transmitters in synaptic cleft, 371 Enzymes. See also specific enzymes and systems in myopathies, 1425 turnover rates of, 166 Ependyma, 160–162, 161f Ephrin in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f, 1172–1176, 1174f, 1175f in hindbrain segmentation, 1115, 1116f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1600

in neural crest cell migration, 1141

in neuromuscular junction development,

1190, 1191f

Ephrin kinases, in axons, 1173–1174, 1175f Ephrin receptors, 1122, 1125f Ephrin-ephrin interactions, in axons, 1173–1174, 1175f EPI (echo planar imaging), in fMRI, 114–115 Epigenetic regulation, 1323 Epilepsy, 1447–1472 autism spectrum disorder and, 1539 autoantibodies to AMPA receptor in, 278 classification of, 1448–1450, 1449t criteria for, 1449–1450 definition of, 1447 development of, 1467–1470 genetic factors in, 1467–1468, 1468f ion channel mutations in, 1467–1469, 1468f kindling in, 1469 maladaptive responses to injury in, 1469–1470, 1470f EEG of. See Electroencephalogram (EEG) epidemiology of, 1448 generalized penicillin, 1461 genetic factors in, 1467–1469, 1468f highlights, 1470–1471 history of, 1447–1448 nocturnal, 1460 psychosocial factors in, 1448 seizure focus localization in. See Seizure focus, localization of seizures in, 1449–1450. See also Seizure(s) silent interval in, 1469 sudden unexpected death in, 1466 syndromes, 1449, 1449t Epileptiform activity, 1454 Epinephrine feedback regulation of, 362–363 synthesis of, 361–362 Episodic memory. See Memory, episodic EPSC (excitatory postsynaptic current), in Schaffer collateral pathway, 1345, 1346f Epsin, 604 EPSP. See Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) Equilibrium, postural. See Balance; Posture, postural equilibrium in Equilibrium potential ion, 193–194 K + , 193, 194f Na+, 198–199 Equivalent circuit definition of, 199 of end-plate current, 269–271, 269f–271f neuron functioning as, 199–201 battery in series and, 200, 200f capacitance and leaky capacitors in, 200 definition of, 199 electrochemical driving force in, 201

electromotive force in, 200–201, 200f

highlights, 208–209

K

+

channel electrical properties in, 200,

200f passive and active current flow in, 201, 201f passive current flow and short circuit in, 201, 201f resting membrane potential calculation via, 202b–203b, 202f, 203f Erb, Wilhelm, 1430 Erectile function, control of, 1266f–1267f, 1270f Error-based learning, 730–732, 731f, 732f 17-β-Estradiol, 1262, 1264f Estratetraenol (EST), perception of, 1280f, 1281 Estrogen, 1263–1264 Estrogen receptors, 1262, 1264, 1265f, 1266f Ethical considerations, in brain-machine interfaces, 970–971 Ethosuximide, 1461 Ethyl alcohol, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Euchromatin, 52 Eukaryote, 52 Eustachian tube, 599, 599f Euthymia, 1504 Evarts, Ed, 831, 845, 851 Evidence, in decision-making accumulation to a threshold, 1401, 1402f noisy, 1397–1400, 1399f, 1400f signal detection theory framework for, 1393, 1394f value-based, 1408–1409 Evoked otoacoustic emission, 616f, 617 Ewins, Arthur, 359 Exchangers (antiporters), 186f, 187 Excitability of neurons, 131, 133 in active zones, 65 axon size on, 206–207 plasticity of, 233 region on, 231, 233 type on, 229–231, 230f voltage-gated channel regulation of, 231, 232f of spinal cord dorsal horn, in hyperalgesia, 481, 482f, 486f Excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC), in Schaffer collateral pathway, 1345, 1346f Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), 255 AMPA and NMDA receptor-channels in, 283–284, 285f to central neurons, 274, 339f in EEG, 1452b–1453b, 1452f at neuromuscular junction. See End-plate potential in short-term habituation, 1314, 1315f Excitatory signals, in stretch reflexes, 63

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Excitatory synaptic transmission,

ionotropic glutamate receptor-

channels in. See Glutamate Extrinsic reinforcement, 945f, 946

Eye(s)

position and velocity of, oculomotor False positive rate, 390b False recognition, 1308

False transmitters, 365, 367. See

also Fluorescent false neurotransmitters (FFNs) Familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome, 1090 Familial epileptic syndromes, 1467 Familial startle disease, 288 Fasciculation, in axon growth and guidance, 1169f Fasciculations, in neurogenic diseases, 1426 Fascin, 604 Fast axonal transport, 143–146, 146f Fast channel syndrome, 1436 Fastigial nucleus, 911, 912f Fasting, eating behavior and, 1038–1039, 1039f Fast-spiking neurons, 231 Fast-twitch motor units, 740–741, 740f Fast-twitch muscle fibers, 1189f Fat storage, 1033–1034 Fatigability, muscle, 742 Fatt, Paul, 257–258, 258f–259f, 260, 332 Fear amygdala in. See Amygdala, in fear response vs. anxiety, 1504. See also Anxiety disorders conditioning of, 1050–1051, 1306. See also Threat conditioning definition of, 1504 fMRI studies of, 1060, 1061f measurement of, 1046b–1047b, 1046t stimulation of neuronal assembly associated with, 1357, 1358f–1359f Feature detectors, in bats, 675, 676f Fechner, Gustav, 387, 1393, 1483 Feedback control. See also Sensorimotor control gain and delay in, 719, 720f for movement correction, 719, 720f optimal, 728–729, 729f for rapid movements, 717f, 719 Feedback inhibition, 401f Feedback projections, 559 Feedforward control, 716–717, 717f Feedforward inhibition in motor neurons, 63–64, 63f in sensory systems, 399–400, 401f Feedforward neural circuits characteristics of, 63f, 64, 102–103, 102f in visual processing and object recognition, 103–104, 103f Feelings, 1045. See also Emotions FEF (frontal eye field), 875, 878f, 879 Feinberg, Irwin, 1494 Ferrier, David, 841 Fever, 1031 FFNs (fluorescent false neurotransmitters), 374b, 374f Ffytche, Dominic, 1476 Fibrillations, 1424f, 1426

19/01/21 9:18 AM

| receptors (receptor-channels), ionotropic Excitotoxicity, in seizure-related brain damage, 1466–1467 Executive control processes, 1292 Exocytosis, 68, 135, 144f from large dense-core vesicles, 370 in synaptic vesicles, 248, 249f, 345–347, 370 Ca 2+ binding to synaptotagmin in, 347, 348f–349f fusion machinery in active zone protein scaffold in, 344f, 347–347, 350f SNARE proteins in, 344f, 345–347, 346f synapsins in, 339, 344f transmembrane proteins in, 343, 344f, 345 in transmitter release, 337–338, 339f fusion pore in, temporary, 338, 341, 342f kinetics of, capacitance measurements of, 338, 340f–341f Exons, 27, 30f, 52, 53 Expectation, in visual processing, 546–547 Experience changes in cortical circuitry from, in visual processing, 546–547 on maternal behavior in rodents, 1274–1275, 1274f synaptic connection refinement and. See Synaptic connections, experience in refinement of Experience sampling, 1047b Explicit learning, 1055, 1288 Explicit memory. See Memory, explicit Exposure therapy, 1518 Expressive aphasia, 17 External auditory meatus, 599, 599f External globus pallidus, 935, 936, 936f Exteroception, 408 Extinction, 1306 Extinction learning, 1518 Extorsion, 861, 861f, 863t Extracellular matrix adhesion, in axon growth and guidance, 1169f Extrafusal muscle fibers, 764b Extraocular eye muscles, 862–865 agonist-antagonist pairs of, 861f, 862, 862f coordinated movements of two eyes by, 862 coordinated movements of two eyes in, 863t cranial nerve control of, 862–863, 863f, 864b, 865f eye rotation in orbit by, 860–861 lesions of, 864b oculomotor neurons for eye position and velocity in, 867, 868f  neurons in, 867, 868f position in orbit, visual neuron responses to, 587–588, 588f rotation in orbit of, 860–861 Eye field frontal, 875, 878f, 879 frontal lesions of, 875 supplementary, 875 Eye movements, 860–861 active sensing in, 723 cerebellum on, 925, 927f coordination of, 862, 863t pathways for, 501, 503f saccadic. See Saccades smooth-pursuit, cerebellum in. See Smooth-pursuit eye movements in vision, 582, 583f. See also Saccades Eye muscles, extraocular, 862–865 agonist-antagonist pairs of, 861f, 862, 862f coordinated movements of two eyes by, 862 coordinated movements of two eyes in, 863t cranial nerve control of, 862–863, 863f, 864b, 865f eye rotation in orbit by, 860–861 lesions of, 864b oculomotor neurons for eye position and velocity in, 867, 868f Eye rotation, in orbit, 860–861 Eye-blink response cerebellum in, 108, 109f classical conditioning of, 925, 1306 Eye-hand coordination, 925, 926f F Face recognition fMRI in studies of, 120–121 fusiform gyrus in. See Fusiform gyrus, in face perception temporal lobe in, 569–570, 570f Facial expression, pattern generators in, 994 Facial motor nucleus, 988f, 989f, 991 Facial nerve (CN VII) autonomic component of, 983 injury to, in Bell palsy, 983–984 internal genu of, 969 as mixed nerve, 983 origin in brain stem, 983f projections of, 1019 Facilitation, presynaptic, 353, 354f F-actin, 745–746, 748f–749f FADD, 1153 Failures, 333 Falck, Bengt, 372b False alarm, in decision-making, 1394f, 1395 False memory, 1482–1483   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1601

Index



Index

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs)

in neural induction, 1112

in neural patterning, 1113–1114, 1114f

Field potentials, 1450 "Fight or flight" response, 1013t, 1021–1022, 1504 filamin A, 1469 Filopodia, 1163f, 1164 Fimbrin, 604 Fingerprint structure, in touch sensitivity, 440b–441b, 440f Fingertip, tactile acuity on, 440–441, 443f First pain, 471f, 472, 490 Fissures, 16 Fixation neurons, 879f Fixation system, 866 Fixation zone, 873 Flanagan, Randy, 464 Flavor, 696, 702 Flexion reflex, 763f, 771–772 Flexion-withdrawal reflex, 763f, 770–772 Flexor and extensor coordination circuit, 793, 794f–795f Flickering, 345 as visual field stimulus, 534b, 535f Flies. See Fruit fly (Drosophila) Flip angle, in fMRI, 114 Flocculonodular lobe. See Vestibulocerebellum Flocculus target neurons, 643 Flourens, Pierre, 10, 21 Fluid balance, 1031–1033, 1032f Fluorescent false neurotransmitters (FFNs), 374b, 374f Fluoxetine indications for, 1515 mechanisms of action of, 1515, 1516f–1517f prenatal exposure to, 1377 Flutter-vibration frequency, 1395–1396, 1396f FMR1 gene mutation, 146, 1531 FMRFamide, on S-type K + channel, 317 fMRI. See Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein), 47, 1531 Focal onset seizures. See Seizure(s), focal onset Foliate papillae, 697, 697f Follistatin, 1111f, 1112 Footplate (stapes) anatomy of, 599, 600 in hearing, 601, 602f–603f for gene, 42, 44, 44f Force, muscle. See Muscle force Forced grasping, 829 Forebrain anatomy of, 12b, 13f embryogenesis of, 1112, 1113f patterning of afferent inputs in, 1124–1126, 1127f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1602

inductive signals and transcription

factors in, 1123–1124, 1126f

isthmic organizer signals in, 1113–1115,

1114f, 1115f prosomeres in, 1123 Forgetting, 1308 Forgotten memory, imprint of, 1482, 1482f Form, detection of, 444 Form agnosia, 1480f, 1488 Formant frequencies, 1371–1372, 1372f Form-cue invariance, in object identification, 571, 572f Forward interference, in fMRI studies, 123 Forward model, sensorimotor, 718b, 718f FosB, 1074 Foster, Michael, 773 Fourneret, Pierre, 1481 Fovea, 522f, 523 Foveola, 522f, 523 Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), 47, 1531 Fragile X syndrome, 47, 1531 Frameshift mutations, 33f Fraternal twins, 27 Freedman, David, 573 Freeze-fracture electron microscopy, of transmitter storage and release, 337–338, 339f Freezing behavior, amygdala in, 1050, 1052f Freiwald, Winrich, 569 Frequency code, 624 Frequency-modulated (FM) component, in bats, 675–677, 676f Freud, Sigmund on agnosia, 566, 1473 on consciousness, 1412 on dreams, 1080 on fear, 1316 Frey, Uwe, 1327, 1348 Friederici, Angela, 1379 Friedman, Jeffrey, 1035 Fritsch, Gustav, 16, 841 Frontal cortex/lobe anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 16 in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f in emotional processing, 1058–1059, 1058b function of, 12b, 16f in language, 1380, 1380f, 1388 lesions of Broca's aphasia with, 1379t, 1384, 1385f on saccades, 875 in voluntary movement, 818–819, 820f Frontal eye field (FEF), 875, 878f, 879 Fronto-orbital cortex, sexual dimorphisms in, 1279, 1279f Frontotemporal dementias, tau protein in, 141b Fruit fly (Drosophila) cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway in threat conditioning in, 1330–1331 long-term memory in, 1331

mating behavior of, genetic and neural

control of, 1266, 1268b, 1269f

memory formation in, 1330–1331

olfactory pathways in, 692–694, 693f protein kinase activation and activity level in, 42, 44, 44f random mutagenesis in, 35b transgenic, generation of, 35b, 39b, 39f Fu, Ying-hui, 42 Functional connectivity analysis, in fMRI, 117f, 119–120 Functional electrical stimulation, in brainmachine interfaces, 954, 965, 967, 969f Functional localization, 9–10, 9f Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) advantages of, 111 of attention to visual stimulus, 402f data analysis in, 115–120 approaches to, 115, 117f for decoding information represented in, 118–119 for localization of cognitive functions, 118 for measurement of correlated activity across brain networks, 119–120 preprocessing for, 115–116 tools for, 116b future progress in, 123–125 insights from studies using, 120–122 challenges to theories from cognitive psychology and systems neuroscience, 121–122 design of neurophysiological studies in animals, 120–121 testing predictions from animal studies and computational models, 122 interpretation and real-world applications of, 122–123, 124f, 125b in language development studies, 1370–1371, 1380–1381 of language processing, 19 of language processing deficits, 1387, 1387f in memory studies, 1298, 1300, 1301f, 1302f of mentalizing system, 1527, 1528f in mood and anxiety disorders, 1509–1511, 1510f neurovascular activity measurement in, 112–115 biology of neurovascular coupling in, 115 physics of magnetic resonance in, 112, 114–115 principles of, 112, 113f in schizophrenia, 1494, 1495f in studies on emotion, 1059–1060, 1061f Functional neuroimaging

19/01/21 9:18 AM

in language development studies,

1370–1371, 1380–1381

in mood and anxiety disorders,

+

postsynaptic cell inhibition by


-

current through, 288–290,

289f, 290f

1509–1511, 1511f in studies on emotion, 1060 Fungiform papillae, 697, 697f Furshpan, Edwin, 243 FUS gene mutations, 1427, 1427t Fusiform cells, in dorsal cochlear nucleus, 657, 658f–659f Fusiform gyrus, in face perception fMRI studies of, 120–121 imaginary, 1484, 1484f measurement of, 1476, 1477f during visual hallucinations, 1477, 1479f Fusimotor system, 766–767, 770f Fusion, vesicle in exocytosis, 338, 341, 342f steps in, 347–349, 348f–349f, 350f Fuxe, Kjell, 998 G G protein effector targets for, 305 interactions with β 2 -adrenergic receptor, 305, 306f ion channel modulation by, direct, 315, 316f, 317f structure of, 305, 306f subunit types in, 305 G protein transducin, rhodopsin on phosphodiesterase via, 526f–527f, 529–530 G protein-coupled receptors, 302, 302f cAMP pathway initiation by, 303–305 common sequence in, 305 glutamate, 277, 277f mechanism of, 251, 251f membrane-spanning domains in, 305, 306f odorant, 684, 685f in sensitization, 1317, 1318f–1319f on voltage-gated Ca 2+ channel opening, 315, 316f G protein-gated inward-rectifier K channel, 315, 316f, 317f G protein-gating, direct, 305 GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) action of, 287 in critical period for language learning, 1377 uptake into synaptic vesicles, 364, 366f GABA receptors (receptor-channels) at central synapses, 1198–1199, 1201f opening of, 288 GABA transporter (GAT1), 366f GABA A receptors (receptor-channels), 287 function of, 288 ionotropic, 278f, 287–288 mutations in, epilepsy and, 1468f nicotinic, subunits of, 278f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1603

(GIRK) in seizures, 1455, 1455f GABA B receptors (receptor-channels), 287 GABAergic neurons in cerebellum, 1143, 1145, 1145f in circadian rhythm, 1088, 1091 in dorsal nucleus of lateral lemniscus, 664 excitability properties of, 229, 230f inhibitory actions produced by, 293–295, 294f, 295f in modulation of primary axon terminals, 777, 777f in neuropathic pain, 481, 483f in ocular dominance plasticity, 1220, 1221f in seizure focus, 1456, 1456f in sleep promotion, 1085–1086 in striatum, 935 Gabapentin, 474 GAD (generalized anxiety disorder), 1505, 1506. See also Anxiety disorders Gag reflex, 993–994 Gage, Phineas, 1058b Gain, in feedback control, 719, 720f Gain field, 587, 588f Gait ataxia, 909 Galanin, in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475 Galen, 8 Gall, Franz Joseph, 9–10, 9f Galton, Francis, 27 Galvani, Luigi, 8 Gamma motor neurons coactivation with alpha neurons, in voluntary movement, 767, 769f, 773–775, 775f in sensitivity of muscle spindles, 765f, 766–767, 770f, 771f in spinal stretch reflex, 764b, 765f γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). See GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) γ-secretase in Alzheimer's disease, 1570–1572, 1571f drugs targeting, 1567–1568 Ganglia autonomic. See Autonomic system basal. See Basal ganglia dorsal root. See Dorsal root ganglia retinal. See Retinal ganglion cells Ganglionic eminences, neuron migration from, to cerebral cortex, 1138–1140, 1140f Gap junction definition of, 239, 244 in glial cells, 248 Gap-junction channels, 239, 242, 243f gene superfamily in, 177, 178f in glial cells, 248

Index


in glial function and disease, 248

interconnected cell firing in, rapid and

synchronous, 247–248, 247f

structure of, 244, 245f, 246f, 247 Garcia-Sierra, Adrian, 1378 Gardner, John, 381 Gaskell, Walter, 1015 Gastrins, 368t Gastrointestinal tract brain stem control of reflexes in, 993 enteric ganglia in, 1019, 1020f vagal neurons in, 985 visceral afferents in, 990–991 Gata2, 1143f, 1145 Gate activation, 218 inactivation, 218–219 Gate control theory, of pain, 488, 488f Gating. See specific types Gating, channel. See also specific channels direct (ionotropic), 250–251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also Second messengers direct G-protein, steps of, 305 exogenous factors on, 174, 175 indirect (metabotropic), 251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also G proteincoupled receptors; Receptor tyrosine kinases molecular mechanisms of, 171–172 physical models of, 172–174, 172f–173f of transduction channels, in hair cells, 609, 610f Gating charge, 221, 223f Gating current, 221, 223f Gating springs, in hair bundles, 609, 610f Gaze control, 860–881 brain stem motor circuits for saccades in, 868–870 brain stem lesions on, 870–871 mesencephalic reticular formation in vertical saccades in, 863f, 870 pontine reticular formation in horizontal saccades in, 868–870, 869f cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and pons in smooth pursuit in, 867f, 878–879, 878f, 916, 916f extraocular eye muscles in, 860–863 agonist-antagonist pairs of, 861f, 862, 862f coordinated movements of two eyes in, 862, 863t cranial nerve control of, 862–863, 863f, 864b, 865f eye rotation in orbit by, 860–861 oculomotor neurons for eye position and velocity in, 867, 868f gaze shifts in, coordinated head and eye movements in, 877–878, 877f gaze system in, 860 highlights, 880–881

19/01/21 9:18 AM
in language development studies,

1370–1371, 1380–1381

in mood and anxiety disorders,

+

postsynaptic cell inhibition by


-

current through, 288–290,

289f, 290f

1509–1511, 1511f in studies on emotion, 1060 Fungiform papillae, 697, 697f Furshpan, Edwin, 243 FUS gene mutations, 1427, 1427t Fusiform cells, in dorsal cochlear nucleus, 657, 658f–659f Fusiform gyrus, in face perception fMRI studies of, 120–121 imaginary, 1484, 1484f measurement of, 1476, 1477f during visual hallucinations, 1477, 1479f Fusimotor system, 766–767, 770f Fusion, vesicle in exocytosis, 338, 341, 342f steps in, 347–349, 348f–349f, 350f Fuxe, Kjell, 998 G G protein effector targets for, 305 interactions with β 2 -adrenergic receptor, 305, 306f ion channel modulation by, direct, 315, 316f, 317f structure of, 305, 306f subunit types in, 305 G protein transducin, rhodopsin on phosphodiesterase via, 526f–527f, 529–530 G protein-coupled receptors, 302, 302f cAMP pathway initiation by, 303–305 common sequence in, 305 glutamate, 277, 277f mechanism of, 251, 251f membrane-spanning domains in, 305, 306f odorant, 684, 685f in sensitization, 1317, 1318f–1319f on voltage-gated Ca 2+ channel opening, 315, 316f G protein-gated inward-rectifier K channel, 315, 316f, 317f G protein-gating, direct, 305 GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) action of, 287 in critical period for language learning, 1377 uptake into synaptic vesicles, 364, 366f GABA receptors (receptor-channels) at central synapses, 1198–1199, 1201f opening of, 288 GABA transporter (GAT1), 366f GABA A receptors (receptor-channels), 287 function of, 288 ionotropic, 278f, 287–288 mutations in, epilepsy and, 1468f nicotinic, subunits of, 278f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1603

(GIRK) in seizures, 1455, 1455f GABA B receptors (receptor-channels), 287 GABAergic neurons in cerebellum, 1143, 1145, 1145f in circadian rhythm, 1088, 1091 in dorsal nucleus of lateral lemniscus, 664 excitability properties of, 229, 230f inhibitory actions produced by, 293–295, 294f, 295f in modulation of primary axon terminals, 777, 777f in neuropathic pain, 481, 483f in ocular dominance plasticity, 1220, 1221f in seizure focus, 1456, 1456f in sleep promotion, 1085–1086 in striatum, 935 Gabapentin, 474 GAD (generalized anxiety disorder), 1505, 1506. See also Anxiety disorders Gag reflex, 993–994 Gage, Phineas, 1058b Gain, in feedback control, 719, 720f Gain field, 587, 588f Gait ataxia, 909 Galanin, in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475 Galen, 8 Gall, Franz Joseph, 9–10, 9f Galton, Francis, 27 Galvani, Luigi, 8 Gamma motor neurons coactivation with alpha neurons, in voluntary movement, 767, 769f, 773–775, 775f in sensitivity of muscle spindles, 765f, 766–767, 770f, 771f in spinal stretch reflex, 764b, 765f γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). See GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) γ-secretase in Alzheimer's disease, 1570–1572, 1571f drugs targeting, 1567–1568 Ganglia autonomic. See Autonomic system basal. See Basal ganglia dorsal root. See Dorsal root ganglia retinal. See Retinal ganglion cells Ganglionic eminences, neuron migration from, to cerebral cortex, 1138–1140, 1140f Gap junction definition of, 239, 244 in glial cells, 248 Gap-junction channels, 239, 242, 243f gene superfamily in, 177, 178f in glial cells, 248

Index


in glial function and disease, 248

interconnected cell firing in, rapid and

synchronous, 247–248, 247f

structure of, 244, 245f, 246f, 247 Garcia-Sierra, Adrian, 1378 Gardner, John, 381 Gaskell, Walter, 1015 Gastrins, 368t Gastrointestinal tract brain stem control of reflexes in, 993 enteric ganglia in, 1019, 1020f vagal neurons in, 985 visceral afferents in, 990–991 Gata2, 1143f, 1145 Gate activation, 218 inactivation, 218–219 Gate control theory, of pain, 488, 488f Gating. See specific types Gating, channel. See also specific channels direct (ionotropic), 250–251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also Second messengers direct G-protein, steps of, 305 exogenous factors on, 174, 175 indirect (metabotropic), 251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also G proteincoupled receptors; Receptor tyrosine kinases molecular mechanisms of, 171–172 physical models of, 172–174, 172f–173f of transduction channels, in hair cells, 609, 610f Gating charge, 221, 223f Gating current, 221, 223f Gating springs, in hair bundles, 609, 610f Gaze control, 860–881 brain stem motor circuits for saccades in, 868–870 brain stem lesions on, 870–871 mesencephalic reticular formation in vertical saccades in, 863f, 870 pontine reticular formation in horizontal saccades in, 868–870, 869f cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and pons in smooth pursuit in, 867f, 878–879, 878f, 916, 916f extraocular eye muscles in, 860–863 agonist-antagonist pairs of, 861f, 862, 862f coordinated movements of two eyes in, 862, 863t cranial nerve control of, 862–863, 863f, 864b, 865f eye rotation in orbit by, 860–861 oculomotor neurons for eye position and velocity in, 867, 868f gaze shifts in, coordinated head and eye movements in, 877–878, 877f gaze system in, 860 highlights, 880–881

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Gaze control (Cont.):

neuronal control systems in, 866–868

active fixation system in, 866

overview of, 866 saccadic system in, 866–867, 867f, 879f smooth-pursuit system in, 866–867, 879f vergence system in, 879–880 sound-localization pathway from inferior colliculus in, 669–670 superior colliculus control of saccades in, 871–875 basal ganglia inhibition of, 873–874, 873f cerebral cortex control of, 871f, 873–877, 874f, 876f, 879f cortical pathways in, 871, 871f experience on, 877 frontal eye field in, 875 movement-related neurons in, 875, 876f rostral superior colliculus in visual fixation in, 873–874 supplementary eye field in, 875 visual neurons in, 875, 876f visuomotor integration into oculomotor signals to brain stem in, 871–873, 873f visuomovement neurons in, 875 Gaze system, 860 GBA1 mutations, 1549 Gbx2, 1114, 1114f GDNF (glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor), 1148, 1149f GEFS+ syndrome (generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus), 1468f, 1469 Gender, 1261 Gender identity, 1261. See also Sexually dimorphic behaviors Gender role, 1261 Gene(s), 7 behavior and. See Gene(s), in behavior on chromosomes, 30–31, 31f conservation of, 32–34, 34f, 52 expression of in brain, 29–30 regulation of, 35b–36b familial risk of psychiatric disorders in, 28f genotype vs. phenotype and, 31–32 glossary of, 53–54 heritability and, 27, 28f mutations in, 32, 33b orthologous, 32, 34f, 52 splicing of, 30f structure and expression of, 29–30, 30f transgenic expression. See Transgenic expression in twins, identical vs. fraternal, 27, 28f Gene(s), in behavior, 26–52 animal models of, 34–45

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1604

circadian rhythm in, transcriptional

oscillator in, 34, 40–42, 41f–43f

classical genetic analysis of, 34

mutation generation in, 35b–36b neuropeptide receptors on social behaviors, 44–45, 45f, 46f protein kinase regulation of activity in flies and honeybees, 42, 44, 44f reverse genetics in, 34 heritability of, 27, 28f highlights, 51–52 human environmental influences and, 46 neurodevelopmental disorders and. See Neurodevelopmental disorders psychiatric disorders and, 48. See also Alzheimer disease (AD); Parkinson disease; Schizophrenia Gene knockout Cre/loxP system for, 35b–36b, 37f developmental abnormalities from, 1351 Gene replacement therapy, for spinal muscular atrophy, 1428, 1429f General linear model (GLM), in fMRI, 118 General somatic motor column, 989f, 991–992 General somatic sensory column, 987, 989f, 990 General visceral motor column, 989f, 990–991 Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 1505, 1506. See also Anxiety disorders Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+ syndrome), 1468f, 1469 Generalized onset seizures. See Seizure(s), generalized onset Generalized penicillin epilepsy, 1461 Genetic analysis, classical, 34 Genetic diversity, mutations in, 32, 33b Genetic imprinting, 1533–1534, 1533f Geniculate nucleus, lateral. See Lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) Geniculate nucleus, medial, 82f, 83 Geniculostriate pathway, in visual processing, 499–502, 503f Genitalia, sexual differentiation of, 1262, 1263f Genome, 52 Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in autism spectrum disorder, 1537 in mood and anxiety disorders, 1507 in schizophrenia, 50–51, 1491–1492 Genotype, 31–32, 52 Gentamicin, on vestibular function, 647 Geometry, object, internal models of, 547– 550, 548f–550f Gephyrin, in central receptors in, 1199, 1201f Geschwind, Norman, 1378 Gestalt, 497, 498f GFP (green fluorescent protein), 372f Ghitani, Nima, 427

Ghrelin, 1035, 1036f–1037f

GHRH, GRH (growth hormone-releasing

hormone), 1028, 1029t Gibbs, F.A., 1461 Gibson, James, 827, 1409, 1410b Gilbert, Charles, 515 Ginty, David, 410, 411f, 431 GIRK (G protein-gated inward-rectifier K + ) channel, 315, 316f, 317f g l (leakage conductance), 213, 218b Gli proteins, 1118–1119 Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), 1148, 1149f Glial cells, 151–160 astrocytes. See Astrocytes functions of, 61–62 GABA uptake into, 366f gap junctions in, 248 highlights, 162 as insulating sheaths for axons, 151–154, 152f, 153f K + permeability of open channels in, 191f, 193–194, 194f microglia. See Microglia oligodendrocytes. See Oligodendrocyte(s) quantity of, 61 radial. See Radial glial cells Schwann cells. See Schwann cells structural and molecular characteristics of, 134–141 in synapse formation and elimination, 1205–1207, 1206f transporter proteins in, 133 types of, 133–134, 134f. See also specific types Glial scar, 1240, 1241f Global aphasia brain damage in, 1386 differential diagnosis of, 1379t spontaneous speech production and repetition in, 1384t, 1386 Globus pallidus anatomy of, 14f, 933f connections of, 934f, 936, 936f external, 935 Glomerulus cerebellar, 918, 919f olfactory bulb, 687–688, 688f, 689f Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) information conveyed by, 429, 985 injury of, 985 as mixed nerve, 985 origin in brain stem, 983f projections of, 1019 Glove-and-stocking pattern, 1428 GluA2 gene, 279, 280f, 281f Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), 1034, 1036f–1037f Glucocorticoid(s), in stress response coordination, 1275 Glucocorticoid receptor gene, tactile stimulation of, 1275

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Glucopenia, 1035

Glucose, blood, 1035

Glutamate

dopamine co-release with, 371 dynorphin co-release with, 371 metabolic, 365 as neurotransmitter, 278, 365 receptors for. See Glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475, 478f vesicular uptake of, 365, 366f Glutamate AMPA-kainate channels, in ON and OFF cells, 536 Glutamate excitotoxicity, 284–285 Glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) astrocytes on, 154, 158f at central synapses, 1198–1199, 1201f ionotropic, 277–283, 277f families/categories of, 277–279, 278f. See also AMPA receptors; Kainate receptors; NMDA-type glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) glutamate excitotoxicity in, 284 protein network at postsynaptic density in, 284, 285f structure and function of, 277–281, 277f–278f, 280f metabotropic, 277, 277f, 1531 overactivation of, in prolonged seizures, 1466 in spinal-cord dorsal horn, 479, 482f Glutamate transporters, 365, 366f, 375–376 Glutamate-gated channel subunits, P-regions in, 178, 179f Glutamatergic neurons in cerebellum, 1145 as chemoreceptors for CO 2 , 996 Glycine on ionotropic receptors, 287 synthesis of, 364 Glycine receptors (receptor-channels) at central synapses, 1198–1199, 1201f function of, 288 inhibitory actions of, 288–290, 289f ionotropic, 278f, 287–288 nicotinic, subunits of, 278f postsynaptic cell inhibition by Cl- current through, 288–290, 289f, 290f Glycine transporter (GLYT2), 366f Glycogen synthase kinase type 3 (GSK3), lithium on, 1520 Glycosylation, 149 GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone), 1028, 1029t Goal-directed behavior basal ganglia in, 946–947 episodic memory in, 1300, 1301f, 1302f motivational states on. See Motivational states Gold particles, electro-opaque, 373f, 374b

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1605

Goldman equation, 199

Goldstein, Kurt, 21

Golgi, Camillo, 8

Golgi cell in cerebellar cortex recurrent loops, 921, 921f in cerebellum, 918, 919f Golgi complex dendrites from, 137, 137f secretory protein modification in, 149–150 structure of, 135, 136f, 137f Golgi staining method, 58–59 Golgi tendon organs, 421 discharge rate of population of, 771b, 771f Ib inhibitory interneurons from, 770, 772f structure and function of, 769–770, 771b, 771f Gonadal hormones, 1262 Gonadal sex, 1261 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 1028, 1029t Gonads embryonic differentiation of, 1261–1262, 1262f hormone synthesis in, 1262–1263, 1263f–1265f, 1265t Go/no-go motor decision, 835 Goodale, Melvin, 1488 Gottesman, Irving, 1491 Gouaux, Eric, 279 Goupil, Louise, 1483 Gracile fascicle, 77f, 81, 450f–451f Gracile nucleus, 77f, 79 Graham Brown, Thomas, 783, 790, 790f Grammar brain processing of, 20 universal, 19 Grand mal seizures. See Seizure(s), generalized onset Grandmother cell, 518 Grandour, Jackson, 1382 Granit, Ragnar, 773 Granule cells/granular layer, of cerebellum anatomy of, 918, 919f, 920 connections to Purkinje cells, 105 inputs to and connectivity of, 104–105 synaptic plasticity of, 108–109, 109f Grasping and reaching abnormal movements for, 779 dorsal premotor cortex in planning for, 831–833, 831f–835f error-based learning in, 730, 731f expansion of visual receptive field after, 827, 828f forced, 829 with paralyzed arm, brain-machine interfaces for, 965, 967, 969f parietal cortex areas in, 825–828, 826f–827f, 828f primary motor cortical neurons in, 847–849, 848f propriospinal neurons in, 778

Index

with prosthetic arm, brain-machine

interfaces for, 965, 967f, 968f

sensory and motor signals for, 719

unconscious guidance system in, 1479–1480, 1480f ventral premotor cortex in planning for, 835, 837f Grating stimuli, 534b, 534f Gravito-inertial force, orienting to, 895, 896f Gravity, in falling, 896 Gray, E.G., 276 Gray matter loss of, in schizophrenia, 1494, 1495f–1496f in spinal cord, 76, 77f, 429–430, 431f Gray type I and II synapses, 276, 276f Green cones, 393, 394f Green fluorescent protein (GFP), 372f Greengard, Paul, 345 Grendel, 381 Grid cells, 1361, 1362f Grid fields, 1361, 1363f Grillner, Sten, 1004 Grip control, touch receptors in, 446–450, 449f Groping movements, 829b Gross, Charles, 568 Ground reaction force, 884, 885b, 885f Growth cone discovery of, 8, 1162–1163 optic chiasm divergence of, 1171–1172, 1172f, 1173f as sensory transducer and motor structure, 1161–1165, 1163f, 1165f actin and myosin in, 1163f, 1164, 1165f calcium in, 1164 cellular motors in, 1164–1165, 1165f central core of, 1163–1165, 1163f filopodia of, 1163f, 1164 lamellipodia of, 1163f, 1164 microtubules in, 1164–1165, 1165f tubulin in, 1163f Growth hormone release-inhibiting hormone. See Somatostatin Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH, GRH), 1028, 1029t GSK3 (glycogen synthase kinase type 3), lithium on, 1520 Guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases), in growth cone, 1164 Guard hairs, 419, 420f–421f Guillain-Barré syndrome, 154, 208, 1429 Guillemin, Roger, 1028 Gurfinkel, Victor, 898 Gustatory cortex, 702, 703f Gustatory sensory neurons, 697, 697f, 702, 703f Gustatory system, 696–703 anatomy of, 696–697, 697f, 702f behavior and, in insects, 702–703 in flavor perception, 702 sensory neurons in, 687f, 702, 703f sensory receptors and cells in, 698–702, 698f–700f

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Index

GWAS. See Genome-wide association

studies (GWAS)

Gyri, 16. See also specific types mechanical force in transduction channel opening in, 609–610, 610f,

611f rotation of compensation by rotational vestibulo- ocular reflex, 640–642, 641f, 642f semicircular canal sensing of, 632–634, 633f, 634f Head, Henry, 18, 898 Head direction cells, 1361, 1364f Head shadowing, 661 Head-impulse test, 638 Head-movement system, 866 Hearing. See also Auditory processing binaural, in sound localization, 652 evolutionary history of, 620b interaural time delay in, 653f, 688 music recognition in, 652 screening, in newborns, 618 sound energy capture by ear in, 600–601, 602f–603f sound shadows in, 652 spectral filtering in, 652, 653f speech recognition in, 652 Hearing loss. See also Deafness conductive, 601 sensorineural, 601, 624, 626f tinnitus in, 624 Heat receptors, 423 Hebb, Donald on cell assemblies, 284, 1356 on memory storage, 1340, 1353 on synaptic connections, 1218 Hebbian synaptic plasticity, 108, 108f Hebb's rule, 1340, 1353 Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 387 Helmholtz, Hermann von on basilar membrane, 604 on cortical plasticity, 559 on electrical activity in axon, 8 on eye movement control, 866 on localization of visual objects, 721 on motor commands from saccades, 582–583 on sensation, 387 on unconscious inference, 1474 Hematopoietic system, regeneration in, 1249 Hemichannels, 244, 245f Hemifield, 501, 502f Hemiretina, 501, 502f Hemispheres cerebellar, 911, 912f. See also Cerebellum cerebral, 14f, 15f, 16. See also Cerebral cortex Hemizygous, 32 Hemodynamic response function, in fMRI, 115 Hemorrhage, brain. See Stroke Henneman, Elwood, 743, 765 Hensch, Takao, 1377 Hensen's cells, 607f Hering-Breuer reflex, 779, 995 Heritability, of neurological, psychiatric, and behavioral traits, 27, 28f. See also Gene(s); specific traits and disorders

| Gyromagnetic ratio, 112 H Habit learning, 1304 Habituation history and definition of, 1314 long-term, 1316, 1316f, 1324, 1325f nonassociative learning in, 1305 physiological basis of, 1314 short-term, 1314, 1315f synaptic transmission in, activity- dependent presynaptic depression of, 1314–1315, 1315f, 1316f Hagbarth, Karl-Erik, 773–774 Haggard, Patrick, 1480 Hair nerve fibers of, 419, 420f–421f types, 419, 420f–421f Hair bundles active motility and electromotility of, 617–618 anatomy of, 604–606, 606f, 607f deflection of, in mechanoelectrical transduction, 606–608, 608f evolutionary history of, 620b in linear acceleration sensing, 634–635, 635f in otoacoustic emissions, 618 in tuning hair cells to specific frequencies, 613–614 Hair cells, 598 anatomy of, 604, 605f–607f in auditory processing, 606–621 dynamic feedback mechanisms of, 613–618 adaptation to sustained stimulation in, 614–616, 615f cochlea amplification of acoustic input sin, 618 cochlea sound energy amplification in, 616–618, 616f, 617f Hopf bifurcation in, 618, 619b, 619f, 620b tuning in, 613–614, 613f ion channels in, 608–609 mechanical sensitivity of, 606–608, 608f presynaptic active zone of, 620–621, 621f receptor potential of, 608–609, 608f ribbon synapses in, specialized, 618–621, 621f transduction channels in, 609–610 transformation of mechanical energy into neural signals by, 606–613 direct mechanoelectrical transduction in, 610–611 hair bundle deflection in, 606–609, 608f  molecular composition of machinery in, 611–613, 612f variations in responsiveness in, 613 drugs on, 609 evolutionary history of, 620b in vestibular system linear acceleration sensing by, 634–635, 635f transduction of mechanical stimuli into neural signals by, 631–632, 631f Half-centers, 880 Halligan, Peter, 1475 Hallucinations definition of, 1474 hypnagogic, 1094 hypnopompic, 1094 olfactory, 691 perception in, 1476–1477, 1478f in schizophrenia, 1476–1477, 1490 Hamburger, Viktor, 1147, 1148f Hand grasping of. See Grasping and reaching location of, sensory inputs for, 720–721 mechanoreceptors of, 437–438, 437f, 438t. See also Cutaneous mechanoreceptors motor cortex representation of, in stringed instrument players, 1335f, 1336 movement of, stereotypical features of, 725–726, 726f proprioception in, 733b, 733f receptive fields of, 457–459, 458f slowly adapting fibers in. See Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers; Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers tactile acuity in, 439–441, 443f Handwriting, motor equivalence in, 726, 727f Haploinsufficiency, 32 Haplotype, 52 Harlow, Harry and Margaret, 1212 Harmonics in bats, 675, 676f specialized cortical neurons for encoding, 673 Harris, Geoffrey, 1028 Harris, Kenneth, 404 Harrison, Ross, 8 Hartline, H. Keffer, 506 Hauptmann, Alfred, 1448 HCN channels, 796b HCN (hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated) channels, 228, 232f Head movements of compensation by translation vestibulo- ocular reflex, 642–643 vestibular information for balance in, 895–897, 896f   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1606

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Heroin, 1072t. See also Drug addiction

Herpes simplex virus (HSV), axonal

transport of, 145b, 145f

Herpes zoster infection, 984 Heterochromatin, 52 Heteronymous muscle, 765 Heterosynaptic process, 1316 Heterozygous, 31 Heuser, John, 337–338, 339f Hickok, Gregory, 1379 High vocal centers (HVCs), 1267, 1271f High-voltage-activated (HVA) Ca 2+ channels, 227, 329, 331t, 332 Hill, A.V., 250 Hillarp, Nils-Åke, 372b Hille, Bertil, 167, 222 Hindbrain anatomy of, 12b, 13f embryogenesis of, 1112, 1113f patterning of, isthmic organizer signals in, 1113–1115, 1114f, 1115f segmentation of, 1115, 1116f Hip extension, in walking, 795, 798f Hip strategy, 889, 891f Hippocampus anatomy of, 14f astrocytes in, 158f in autism, 1539 autobiographical memory disorders and dysfunction of, 1367 cytoarchitecture of, 93, 93f, 138f damage to, 121, 1050 in emotion expression, 1050 in episodic memory for building relational associations, 1300–1302, 1302f for goal-directed behavior, 1300, 1302f explicit memory and synaptic plasticity in, 1340–1353 cortical connections for, 94–95, 94f, 95f general mechanisms of, 1340–1342, 1341f long-term potentiation in at distinct pathways, 1342–1345, 1343f, 1344f–1345f early and late phases of, 1347–1349, 1347f molecular and cellular mechanisms of, 1345–1347, 1346f properties of, 1349–1350, 1349f spatial memory and. See Memory, spatial spike-timing-dependent plasticity for altering synaptic strength, 1349 explicit memory processing in subregions of, 1358–1360 pattern completion in CA3 region, 1360 pattern separation in dentate gyrus, 1359–1360 social memory encoding in CA3 region, 1360

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1607

functions of, 12b

integrated circuits in, 94

in memory retrieval, 1300

in mood disorders, 1512 neurons of generated in adults, 1249, 1250f, 1359–1360, 1512 growth and polarity of, 1157, 1158f in post-traumatic stress disorder, 1512, 1518 ribosomal RNA in, 147f in schizophrenia, 1494 spatial cognitive maps in, 99–102, 1360–1367 entorhinal cortex neurons in, 1361–1362, 1362f, 1363f, 1364f, 1365 place cells in, 89f, 99–101, 1365–1367, 1365f, 1366f short-wave ripples in, 101–102, 101f in stimulus-response learning, 1304, 1305f visual memory and, 578 Histamine itch from, 425 nociceptor sensitization by, 478 synthesis and action of, 363–364 Histaminergic neurons location and projections of, 999f, 1001 in sleep-wake cycle, 1085 Histochemical analysis, of chemical messengers, 372b–374b, 372f, 373f Histone acetylation, in long-term sensitization, 1322f, 1323 Hitzig, Eduard, 16, 841 Hodgkin, Alan, 199, 212–217. See also Voltage-clamp studies Hodgkin-Huxley model, 219–220, 219f Hoffmann reflex noninvasive tests in humans, 772b, 773, 779 technique for measurement of, 768b, 768f Holistic view, of brain, 10 Holmes, Gordon, 909 Homeobox, 1119 Homeodomain proteins, 1114 in motor neuron differentiation, 1120, 1121f in ventral spinal cord patterning, 1118f, 1119 Homeostasis emotional response and, 1060, 1062 hypothalamus in. See Hypothalamus, in homeostatic regulation principles of, 1011–1013, 1012f Homogenetic induction, in dorsoventral patterning, 1116 Homonymous muscle, 765 Homosexual brains, sexually dimorphic structures in, 1280f, 1281, 1281f Homosynaptic depression, 1314

Index


Homozygous, 765

Homunculus, 84–85, 84f, 454, 454f–455f

Honeybee activity, protein kinase

regulation of, 44, 44f Hopf bifurcation, 618, 619b, 619f, 620b Horizontal cells, photoreceptor, 524f, 536–537 Horizontal motion, postural response to, 895–897 Horizontal plane, of central nervous system, 11b Hormones. See also specific hormones action of, 359 vs. neurotransmitters, 359 physiologic responses to, hypothalamus in. See Hypothalamus, neuroendocrine system of processing of precursors of, 368, 369f regulation by, 1261 sex, 1260–1261 steroid, biosynthesis of, 1262, 1264f Horner syndrome, 864b Horsley, Victor, 1448 Hortega, Rio, 159 Hospitalism, 1212 Hox genes conservation of, in Drosophila, 1120, 1121f on motor neuron differentiation and diversification, 1120–1121, 1121f, 1123f Hox proteins on motor neuron differentiation and diversification, 1121–1123, 1124f on motor neuron subtype in brain and spinal cord, 1120, 1121f Hoxb1 in hindbrain segmentation, 1115, 1116f on motor neuron subtype in hindbrain and spinal cord, 1120, 1121f, 1123f HPA (hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal) axis, 1508–1509, 1508f HPETEs (hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids), 311f H-reflex. See Hoffmann reflex 5-HT. See Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) HTT gene, 1546 Hubel, David on auditory cortex, 667–668 on receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells, 507–508 on sensory deprivation, 1213–1214, 1214f–1216f on stereoscopic vision, 1217–1218 Hughes, F. Barbara, 375 Hume, David, 387, 497 Humphrey, David, 850 Hunger drive, 1038–1039, 1039f. See also Energy balance, hypothalamic regulation of Huntingtin, 1545–1546

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Huntington disease

basal ganglia dysfunction in, 948

epidemiology of, 1545

gene expression alteration from protein misfolding in, 1555–1556 genetics of, 1545–1556 mouse models of, 1552, 1554f pathophysiology of, 285, 948, 1545 signs and symptoms of, 1545 striatum degeneration in, 1545 treatment of, 1556–1557 Huxley, A.F., 212–217, 747. See also Voltage-clamp studies Huxley, H.E., 747 HVA (high-voltage-activated) Ca 2+ channels, 227, 329, 331t, 332 HVCs (high vocal centers), 1267, 1271f Hydranencephaly, 981 Hydration, waters of, 167 Hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HPETEs), 311f 5-Hydroxytryptamine. See Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) Hyperacusis, 993 Hyperalgesia, 476–484 axon reflex in, 479 C fiber repetitive firing in, 479, 482f central sensitization in, 479 definition and symptoms of, 472 dorsal horn neuron excitability in, 481, 482f neurogenic inflammation in, 479, 480f neuropeptides and small molecules in, 476, 478–479 neurotrophins in, 479, 481f nociceptor sensitization in, 476, 478–479, 479f second-messenger pathways in, 481 tissue inflammation in, 479, 480f Hypercapnia, 995–996 Hypercolumns, in primary visual cortex, 508, 510f–511f Hyperekplexia, 288 Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, 1442–1444, 1443f Hypermetria, 896 Hyperpolarization, 65, 191, 192b, 192f Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, 228, 232f Hyperreflexia, from spinal cord transection, 780 Hypertropia, trochlear nerve lesion in, 864b, 865f Hypnagogic hallucinations, 1094 Hypnogram, 1081f Hypnopompic hallucinations, 1094 Hypocretins, in narcolepsy, 1094–1095, 1094f Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), 983f, 985, 995 Hypoglossal nucleus, 989f, 992 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis, 1442, 1444f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1608

Hypomanias, 1504

Hyposmia, 691

Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)

axis, 1508–1509, 1508f Hypothalamus, 14f, 1010–1042 anterior, sexual dimorphism and, 1278, 1278f in depression, 1508, 1508f in emotional expression, 978, 1049 highlights, 1041–1042 in homeostatic regulation, 12b, 978, 1013, 1013t, 1015 body temperature, 1029–1031, 1029b energy balance. See Energy balance, hypothalamic regulation of thirst drive, 1033 water balance, 1031–1033, 1032f neural circuit of, on mating behavior, 1272 neuroactive peptides of, 367t neuroendocrine system of, 978, 1026–1029, 1027f axon terminals in posterior pituitary on, 1027, 1028f neurons on endocrine cells in anterior pituitary on, 1028–1029, 1028f, 1029t paraventricular nucleus on, 1027, 1027f sexually dimorphic regions of control of sexual, aggressive, and parenting behaviors in, 1039–1041, 1040f olfactory activation in, 1280f, 1281 in sleep-wake cycle. See Ascending arousal system structure of, 1013, 1014f Hypotonia, in cerebellar disorders, 909 Hypoxia, 995 Hysteria, on subjective reports, 1485 Hysterical amnesia, 1485 Hyvärinen, Juhani, 463 I I. See Current (I) I (intensity), of stimulus, 387 Ia fibers, 763f, 764–765, 767f Ia inhibitory interneurons. See Inhibitory interneurons Ib interneurons. See Inhibitory interneurons IB4, 410, 411f I c (capacitive current), in voltage clamp, 213 Ictal phase, 1454 Ideas of reference, 1490 Identical twins, 27 Identity, gender, 1261 I l (leakage current), 213, 216f, 218b IL-6 class cytokines, 1146, 1146f Illuminant intensity, variation in, 540 I m (membrane current), 213 Imagination, episodic memory and, 1300, 1301f Imaging, and behavior. See Functional magnetic resonance imaging

(fMRI)

Imipramine, 1514, 1516f–1517f Immunoglobulins, in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f Immunohistochemical localization, of chemical messengers, 372b–374b, 372f, 373f Implicit memory. See Memory, implicit Imprinting genetic (parental), 1533–1534, 1533f in learning in birds, 1211 In vitro preparations, for studies of central organization of networks, 787b, 787f Inactivation of Ca 2+ channel, voltage-dependent, 174, 174f of K + channel, 217, 219f of Na + channel, 217–219, 219f in prolonged depolarization, 217–218, 219f of voltage-gated channels, 174, 174f in skeletal muscle, 1441, 1443f Inactivation gate, 218–219 Incentive motivation theory, 1038, 1039f Incentive stimuli, rewarding, 1066 Incus anatomy of, 599, 599f in hearing, 601, 602f–603f Indirect channel gating, 250–251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also G proteincoupled receptors; Receptor tyrosine kinases Indirect immunofluorescence, 372f, 373b Indirect pathway, in explicit memory storage, 1340 Individuality, learning-induced brain structure changes in, 1335f, 1336 Indoles, 363 Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for ALS treatment of, 1254f methods for creating, 1142–1143, 1253–1254, 1253f organoid generated from, 1144f Induction, neural bone morphogenetic proteins in, 1110–1112, 1111f definition of, 1108 in neural development, 1110 in rostrocaudal neural tube patterning, 1112 Infant-directed speech, 1377–1378 Infants, sleep in, 1092 Inferior cerebellar peduncle, 911, 912f Inferior colliculus afferent auditory pathway convergence in, 663f, 664–665 anatomy of, 664 response inhibition by lateral lemniscus, 663–664

19/01/21 9:18 AM

sound localization from, in superior

colliculus spatial sound map, 665,

666f

transmission of auditory information to cerebral cortex from, 665–671 auditory cortex mapping of sound and, 668–669, 668f auditory information processing in multiple cortical areas in, 669 cerebral cortex auditory circuit processing streams in, 670, 671f gaze control in, 669–670 stimulus selectivity along the ascending pathway in, 665, 667–668, 667f Inferior salivatory nucleus, 989f, 991 Inferior temporal cortex, object recognition in. See Object recognition, inferior temporal cortex in Inferior vestibular nerve, 630f, 632 Inflammation neurogenic, 479, 480f tissue, 478, 479 Information processing, 1473 Information transfer rate (ITR), 964–965 Inhalants, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Inheritance, sex-linked, 31 Inhibition autogenic, 769–770 at chemical synapses, mechanisms of, 288–289, 289f feedback, 63f, 64 feedforward, 63f, 64–65 postsynaptic, 353, 354f in postsynaptic neuron, distance traveled in effect of, 294, 295f presynaptic, 317, 353, 354f sculpting role of, 290, 290f Inhibitory interneurons convergence of sensory inputs on, 772–773 feedforward and feedback in, 63f, 64–65 input from Golgi tendon organs, 770, 771b in locomotion, 770, 772f on muscles surrounding a joint, 775, 776f in relay nucleus, 400, 401f in spinal cord, 89 synaptic terminals of, 276, 276f Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) to central neurons, 274, 275f mechanism of, in Cl- channels, 288, 289f Inhibitory signals, 63–64 Inhibitory surround, 1456–1457, 1456f, 1457f Initial segment, 57f Initial segment, of axon, 58 Inking response, in Aplysia, 247, 247f Innate fear. See Fear Inner ear, 599–600, 600f. See also Cochlea; Vestibular apparatus Inner plexiform layer, 1182–1183, 1184f Innervation number, 739, 739t Input signal, 66, 66f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1609

Insertional plaque, 614

Inside-out neuronal migration, 1136f–1137f,


Insomnia, 1092–1093 Insular cortex (insula) anatomy of, 12b in emotional processing, 1056, 1058b, 1060 pain control by, 485–486, 487b, 487f Insulin in aging process, 1564 on appetite, 1035, 1036f–1037f as neuroactive peptide, 368t Insulin-like growth factors, in aging process, 1564 Intact preparations, for locomotion studies, 785b Integration contour. See Contour, integration of in neural circuits, 105–107, 106f of sensory information in balance, 899f, 900, 901f in posture, 894–897, 901–902. See also Posture in vestibular nuclei. See Vestibular nuclei synaptic. See Synaptic integration visuomotor, in superior colliculus, 871–873, 873f Integrins in neural crest cells, 1141 in neuron migration along glial cells, 1137 Intellectual disability, 1523. See also Neurodevelopmental disorders Intensity (I) , of stimulus, 387 Intention (action) tremor, 909 Intentional binding, 1480, 1480f Interaction torques, 909, 910f Interaural intensity differences, lateral superior olive in, 659, 661–662, 662f Interaural time differences (ITDs) in auditory localization in owls, 1227–1228, 1227f–1229f medial superior olive map of, 657, 659, 660f–661f in sound localization, 652, 653f Interconnected neuronal pathways, 68 Interictal period, 1454 Interlimb coordination, 788, 795 Intermediate-level visual processing. See Visual processing, intermediate-level Internal genu, of facial nerve, 991 Internal globus pallidus, 935, 935f, 936, 936f Internal medullary lamina, of thalamus, 82f, 83 Internal models, sensorimotor, 718b, 718f International League Against Epilepsy, seizure classification, 1448–1449, 1449t Interneurons, 61 functional components of, 64, 64f Index


inhibitory. See Inhibitory interneurons

in olfactory bulb, 687, 687f

projection, 61, 64, 64f

relay, 61 in retina. See Retina, interneuron network in output of Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, 870 Interoception, 408 Interspike intervals, 396, 397f Intorsion, 861, 861f, 863t Intracortical electrodes, penetrating, 956–957, 957f Intrafusal muscle fibers gamma motor neurons on, 766–767, 769f in muscle spindles, 421, 422f, 764b, 765f Intralaminar nuclei, of thalamus, 82f, 83 Intralimb coordination, 788 Intraperiod line, 1431f Intrinsic reinforcement, 944–946, 945f Introns, 27, 30f, 52, 53 Inverse model, sensorimotor, 718b, 718f Inward current, ionic, 258 Ion(s). See specific ions Ion channels, 65, 165–188. See also specific channels blockers of, 172 in central pattern generator function, 796b characteristics of, 171–174 conformational changes in opening/ closing, 172–174, 172f–173f passive ion flux, 171–172, 171f single, currents through, 169–171, 170b, 170f voltage-gated. See Voltage-gated ion channels; specific channels conductance of, 171–172, 171f definition of, 167 desensitization of, 173 dysfunction of, diseases caused by, 165 functional characteristics of, 169–171 functional states of, 172–173 gated, 190 genes for, 175–176 genetic mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467–1469, 1468f highlights, 187–188 vs. ion pumps, 186f, 187 ion size on movement through, 167 in mechanoreceptors, 415–416, 416f, 417f properties of, 166 receptor gating of direct (ionotropic), 250–251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also Second messengers indirect (metabotropic), 250–251, 251f, 302–303, 302f. See also G proteincoupled receptors; Receptor tyrosine kinases resting, 190 roles of, 165–166 saturation effect in, 171 selectivity filters in, 167–168, 168f–169f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Ion channels (Cont.):

selectivity of, 166, 167–168, 168f–169f

in signaling, rapid, 166

on memory, 1292

on perception, 383

on selection, 941

outward, 220

voltage-gated, on conductance, 217–219,

218b, 218f–219f

K + equilibrium potential (E K ), 193, 194f K + permeability, of glial cell open channels, 191f, 193–194, 194f Kainate receptors excitatory synaptic action regulation by, 277, 277f gene families encoding, 278 structure of, 279 Kalman, Franz, 1490 Kalman filter, 962, 965, 966f Kanner, Leo, 1524 Kant, Immanuel on perception, 497 on senses and knowledge, 387, 391 Kanwisher, Nancy, 569, 1382 Kappa (κ) receptors, opioid, 489, 490, 490t Karlin, Arthur, 264, 265f Katz, Bernard on action potential, 212 on Ca 2+ influx in transmitter release, 327 on end-plate potential, 257–258, 258f–259f, 260 on membrane potential, 199 on presynaptic terminal depolarization in transmitter release, 324–326, 325f–326f on quantal synaptic transmission, 332–333 K + -Cl -cotransporter, 197f, 198–199 K-complexes, EEG, 1081f, 1082 KcsA (non–voltage gated) K + channels, 180–182, 181f, 184f Keele, Steven, 923 Kennedy disease (spinobulbar muscular atrophy), 1546, 1547t, 1551f, 1552 Kenyon cells, 1330 Ketamine, 1515 Kety, Seymour, 1490–1491 Kindling, 1469 Kinesin, 144 Kinocilium, 606, 606f Kiss-and-run pathway, 341, 343f Kiss-and-stay pathway, 341, 343f Kisspeptin, 1028 Klatzky, Roberta, 436 Kleitman, Nathaniel, 1082 Klüver, Henrich, 1049 Klüver-Bucy syndrome, 1049 Knee-jerk reflex, 62, 62f, 66, 66f Knowledge, semantic, 1303 Koch, Christof (Christopher), 1475 Koffka, Kurt, 497 Köhler, Wolfgang, 95 Kohn, Alfred, 359 Kommerell, Guntram, 877 Koniocellular layers, lateral geniculate nucleus, 501, 512 Konorski, Jerzy, 71 Kouider, Sid, 1483

| structure of protein in, 165–167, 168f–169f studies of, 174–177 amino acid sequences, 176, 176f chimeric channels, 176–177 gene families, 177–179, 178f, 179f hydrophobicity plot, 176, 176f secondary structure, 176, 176f site-directed mutagenesis in, 177 subunits in, 175, 175f Ion flux conductance and driving forces in, 195 vs. diffusion, 171–172, 171f Ion pump, 165, 166 ATP in, 166 vs. ion channel, 186f Ion transporter, 165–166, 186f. See also specific types Ionotropic receptors. See also Glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) on balance of charge, 301–302 functional effects of, 312, 312t functions of, 250–251, 251f vs. metabotropic receptors, 251, 312–313, 312t, 313f, 314f neurotransmitter activation of, 239, 301–302, 302f IP3 from phospholipase C hydrolysis of phospholipids in, 305–308, 307f in synaptic plasticity, 351 iPS cells. See Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells Isa, Tadashi, 778 Ishihara test, 538f, 539 Isometric contraction, 749, 758 Isoprenylation, 148 Isthmic organizer, 1113–1114, 1114f, 1115f Itch C fibers in, 425 from histamine, 425 properties of, 425–426 spinothalamic system in, 450f–451f ITDs. See Interaural time differences (ITDs) Ito, Masao, 923, 928 Ivry, Richard, 923 J Jackson, John Hughlings, 10, 841, 1448 Jacksonian march, 1448 Jahnsen, Henrik, 1461 JAK2, 1133 JAK/STAT signaling, in axon regeneration, 1247, 1248f James, William on attention, 588 on fear, 1047–1048, 1049f on learning of visual associations, 575  Jasper, Herbert, 1448, 1461 Jeannerod, Marc, 1481 Jeffress, Lloyd, 657 jimp mouse, 156b Johansson, Roland on grip control, 446 on tactile sensitivity, 438, 441–442 Joint receptors, 421 Joints, coordination of muscles at, 775–776, 776f Jorgensen, Erik M., 341 Jugular foramen, 984f, 986 Julius, David, 423 Junctional folds, 255, 256f K K + buffering, astrocytes in, 154  K  +  channels  in central pattern generator function,  796b  electrical properties of, 200–201, 200f, 201f inactivation of, 217, 219f M-type (muscarine-sensitive), 313, 314f, 315 non–voltage gated (KcsA), 180–182, 181f, 184f permeability and selectivity of, 180–182, 181f P-regions in, 178, 179f resting potential, 195, 196f serotonin-sensitive (S-type), 317, 318f, 353–354 structure of, 167, 168f–169f vs. CIC-1 channels, 185, 186 gene families in, 178–179, 178f x-ray crystallographic analysis of, 180–182, 181f voltage-gated, 227–231 in action potential. See Voltage-gated ion channels, in action potential A-type, 231, 232f autoantibodies to, in peripheral neuropathies, 1432 calcium-activated, 229, 1468f channel gating mechanisms in, 182–185, 183f, 184f in epilepsy, 1455, 1455f genetic factors in diversity of, 178, 179f, 225, 226f, 227–228 genetic mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467, 1468f ion conduction in, 261 Na + channel interdependence with, 212–213, 214b–215b pore-forming α-subunits in, 225, 226f K + current membrane depolarization on magnitude and polarity of, 216–217, 217f   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1610

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Kraepelin, Emil, 1489, 1567

Krebs, Edward, 303

krox20, 1115, 1116f speech motor patterns in, 1373

speech perception and production in,

1373–1374, 1374f–1375f Index Lateral hypothalamic area, 1013

Lateral intraparietal area (LIP)

in decision-making, 1401, 1403,

1404f–1405f, 1406f lesions of, 874 on saccades, 875 in visual attention and saccades parietal neuron activation for, 874, 874f priority map for, 591, 592b–593b, 592f, 593f in visual processing, 504f–505f, 505 in voluntary movement, 825, 826f–827f Lateral lemniscus, 663–664. See also Inferior colliculus; Superior olivary complex Lateral nuclear group, nociceptive information relay to cerebral cortex by, 484–485 Lateral nucleus, of amygdala, 1051, 1052f Lateral protocerebrum, 693f, 694 Lateral sclerosis, 1426 Lateral ventricles, in schizophrenia, 1492, 1493f Lateral vestibular nucleus. See also Vestibular nuclei in locomotion, 802–803, 803f in vestibulo-ocular reflex, 636, 641f Lateral vestibulospinal tract, in automatic postural response, 902 Lauterbur, Paul, 125 Law of dynamic polarization, 1156–1157 Leakage channels, 203b, 213 Leakage conductance (g l ), 213, 218b Leakage current (I
l l ), 213, 216f, 218b Learning. See also Memory; specific types associative, 1304–1306 brain structure changes in, in individuality, 1335f, 1336 constraint of, by sensorimotor representations, 734 critical periods in, 1211 dopamine as signal in, 1068–1069, 1069f error-based, 730–732, 731f, 732f explicit, 730, 1055 fMRI studies of, 122 implicit. See Learning, implicit memory and. See Memory motor skill. See Motor skill learning nonassociative, 1305–1306 overall perspective of, 1287–1289 perceptual, 559, 561f of sensorimotor skills, 1304 skill, 1304 spatial. See Memory, spatial statistical, 1303–1304 trial-and-error, 1307 Learning, implicit amygdala and hippocampus in, 1054–1055 motor tasks, 729–730 in visual memory, selectivity of neuronal responses in, 573, 574f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

| Kuffler, Stephen, 258–259, 506, 558 Kuhl, Patricia, 1373–1374, 1381 Kunkel, Louis, 1439 Kuypers, Hans, 998 Kv1 gene family, 227–228 L L cones, 525, 526f, 529, 538 L opsin, 528f Labeled line, 517, 1170f–1171f Labyrinth bony, 630 membranous, 630, 630f, 631 Lacunes, 1567 Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 332, 1436–1437 Lamellipodia, 1163f, 1164 Lamina dorsal horn, 474–475, 475f, 476f spinal cord, 429–430, 431f Lamina-specific synapses in olfactory system, 1184–1185, 1185f in retinal, 1184f in retinal ganglion cells, 1182–1184 Laminin in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f in neurite outgrowth, 1243–1244 in presynaptic specialization, 1192, 1194f Laminin-211, in presynaptic specialization, 1192 Lampreys, swimming in, 784f–795f, 786–788, 788f, 792 Landott, Edwin, 866 Langley, J.N. on autonomic system, 1015 on axonal outgrowth, 1166 on neurotransmitters, 358 on receptors, 8, 250 on synaptic connection specificity, 1182, 1183f Language learning highlights, 1388–1389 in infants and children, 1371, 1372–1378, 1374f–1375f continuous speech in, transitional probabilities for, 1376–1377 critical period in, 1377 early neural architecture development, 1380–1381 native-language discrimination and, 1374 “parentese” speaking style in, 1377–1378 prosodic cues for words and sentences in, 1376 second language exposure and, 1378 Skinner vs. Chomsky on, 1373 specialization by 1 year in, 1373, 1374f–1375f  stages of, 1372–1373 visual system in, 1376 neural commitment in, 1377 in non-human species, 1371 of second language, 1378 Language processing in Broca’s area. See Broca’s area disorders of, brain functional localization in, 1382–1388 brain damage studies of, 19–20 in Broca’s aphasia. See Broca’s aphasia in conduction aphasia. See Conduction aphasia early studies of, 16–18 in global aphasia, 1386 in less common aphasias, 1386–1388, 1387f in transcortical aphasias, 1386 in Wernicke’s aphasia. See Wernicke’s aphasia functional brain imaging of, 19, 1370–1371 highlights, 1388–1389 neural basis of dual-stream model for, 1379–1380, 1380f left hemisphere dominance in, 1381–1382 neural architecture development in infancy, 1380–1381 prosody in, right and left hemispheres engagement in, 1382, 1383f Wernicke model of, 17 Wernicke-Geschwind model of, 1378–1379, 1379t right hemisphere in, 18 of sign language, 19–20, 20f structural levels of, 1371–1372 in Wernicke’s area. See Wernicke’s area Large dense-core vesicles, 144f, 150, 359, 365, 370 Larmor equation, 112 Lashley, Karl, 18–19, 1340 Lateral, 11b, 11f Lateral columns, spinal cord, 77, 77f Lateral ganglionic eminences, neuron migration to cerebral cortex from, 1140, 1140f Lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) anatomy of, 82f, 1214, 1214f projections to visual cortex of columns of, 508–509, 511f intrinsic circuitry of, 512–516, 514f optic radiations, 74 receptive fields of, 508f synapse formed by, 83 receptive fields in, 506, 508f retinal input segregation in, in utero, 1224–1225, 1225f, 1226f in visual processing, 501   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1611



Index

Lederman, Susan, 436

Left hemisphere

in language processing, 1381–1382

in prosody, 1382, 1383f Left temporal cortex, in language, 1387–1388, 1387f Left-right coordination, in locomotion, 793, 794f–795f Legs muscle contractions of, in stepping, 788–789, 789f muscles of, 752–754, 753t Leibel, Rudolph, 1035 Lemniscus, medial, 80f–81f, 81–82, 450f–451f Length constant, 205, 205f Lengthening contraction, 749, 751f, 757f, 758 Lenneberg, Eric, 1377 Lens, 521, 522f Leptin, 1035, 1036f–1037f Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), 1146, 1146f Levi-Montalcini, Rita, 1147 Lewy bodies, in Parkinson disease, 141b, 142f, 1553, 1554f L-glutamate, 1143 Liberles, Stephen, 426 Libet, Benjamin, 1480 Lichtheim, 1378 Licking movements, pattern generator neurons on, 994 Liddell, E.G.T, 762 Lie detection, fMRI in, 125b Life span average human, 1561, 1562f genetic control of, 1564, 1566f research on extending, 1566 Ligand-gated channels, 132, 166. See also Glutamate receptors (receptorchannels); specific types energy for, 173–174 gene superfamily in, 177, 178f physical models of, 172–173, 173f refractory states in, 173 Light activation, of pigment molecules, 526f, 528–529, 528f, 529f Light adaptation, in retina. See Retina, light adaptation in Likely gene disrupting (LGD) mutations, 33f, 49 LIM homeodomain proteins, 1125f Limb ataxia, 909 Limb movements, cerebellum in learning of, 925, 926f Limb proprioception, mechanoreceptors for, 415t Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, 1437, 1439 Limbic system, 1050, 1051f Line label, 517, 517f Linear motion otolithic organ sensing of, 634–635 postural response to, 895–897 vestibulo-ocular reflex compensation for, 642–643

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1612

LIP. See Lateral intraparietal area (LIP)

Lipid bilayer, 165, 167, 168f–169f, 200

Lipoxygenases, on arachidonic acid, 310

Lis1 mutations, 1136f–1137f, 1138 Lisman, John, 1348 Lissencephaly, neuronal migration in, 1136f–1137f, 1138 Lithium, for bipolar disorder, 1519 Llinás, Rodolfo, 327, 327f, 1461 Lloyd, David, 411, 412t Local field potentials, in brain-machine interfaces, 954 Local interneurons, 64, 64f Local sleep, 1091 Localization auditory, in owls, 1227–1228, 1227f–1229f in brain, language processing and, 16–20 immunohistochemical, of chemical messengers, 372b–374b, 372f, 373f of seizure focus, for epilepsy surgery, 1463–1465 of sound. See Sound, localization of ultrastructure, of chemical messengers, 373b–374b, 373f Locke, John, 387, 497 Lockhart, Robert, 1297 Locomotion, 783–812 basal ganglia in, 807–809 cerebellum on regulation and descending signals in, 806–807 computational network modeling of circuits in, 809 highlights, 811–812 human, 809–811, 810b locomotor system in, 783, 784f muscle activation pattern in, 786–789, 788f, 789f posterior parietal cortex in planning of, 806, 807f, 808f somatosensory inputs in modulation of, 795–799 mechanoreceptors in adjustment to obstacles, 798–799 proprioception on regulation of timing and amplitude, 795, 798, 798f, 799f spinal organization of motor pattern of, 790–795 central pattern generators in, 791–792 experience on, 792 flexor and extensor contraction in, 790–791, 790f rhythm- and pattern-generated circuits in, 792–795 flexor and extensor coordination, 793, 794f–795f interlimb coordination, 795 left-right coordination, 793, 794f–795f quadrupedal central pattern generator, 793, 794f–795f swimming central pattern generator, 792, 794f–795f spinal cord transection studies of, 790–792, 790f, 791f studies of, 783–785, 785b–787b, 786f–787f supraspinal structures in adaptive control of, 799–804

brain stem nuclei for posture regulation, 802–804 midbrain nuclei for initiation and maintenance, 800, 801f, 802f midbrain nuclei projection to brain stem neurons, 800–802, 801f visually guided, motor cortex in, 804–806, 805f Locus (gene), 30 Locus ceruleus in ascending arousal system, 1084, 1084f in attentiveness and task performance, 1005, 1005f firing patterns of, in sleep-wake cycle, 1001, 1001f Loewi, Otto, 180, 315, 316f, 359 Lømo, Terje, 284, 1342 Long arm, chromosome, 53 Long noncoding RNAs, 29 Longevity. See Life span Longitudinal fasciculus medial, lesions on eye movements, 869f, 870 superior, in language development, 1382 Long-term depression (LTD) after eye closure, on visual development, 1220 of auditory input to amygdala, 1334 behavioral role of, 1356f, 1357 in cerebellum, 1353 in drug addiction, 1075 of synaptic transmission, in memory, 1353, 1356f, 1357 Long-term memory. See Memory, explicit; Memory, implicit Long-term potentiation (LTP) AMPA receptors in, 1334 in amygdala, 1332–1333, 1333f definition of, 1350 in drug addiction, 1075 in fear conditioning, 1332–1333, 1333f gene expression in, 1333–1334 in hippocampus. See Hippocampus induction vs. expression of, 1345 NMDA receptors in, 284, 286f–287f, 1332–1333 in spatial memory. See Memory, spatial in synaptic plasticity, 351 Lou Gehrig disease. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) Lower motor neuron(s), 1426 Lower motor neuron disorders, 1426. See also Motor neuron diseases Low-pass behavior, 534b, 534f Low-pass spatial filtering, 534b, 534f Low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs), 420f–421f Low-voltage activated (LVA) Ca 2+ channels, 227

19/01/21 9:18 AM
Index

Lederman, Susan, 436

Left hemisphere

in language processing, 1381–1382

in prosody, 1382, 1383f Left temporal cortex, in language, 1387–1388, 1387f Left-right coordination, in locomotion, 793, 794f–795f Legs muscle contractions of, in stepping, 788–789, 789f muscles of, 752–754, 753t Leibel, Rudolph, 1035 Lemniscus, medial, 80f–81f, 81–82, 450f–451f Length constant, 205, 205f Lengthening contraction, 749, 751f, 757f, 758 Lenneberg, Eric, 1377 Lens, 521, 522f Leptin, 1035, 1036f–1037f Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), 1146, 1146f Levi-Montalcini, Rita, 1147 Lewy bodies, in Parkinson disease, 141b, 142f, 1553, 1554f L-glutamate, 1143 Liberles, Stephen, 426 Libet, Benjamin, 1480 Lichtheim, 1378 Licking movements, pattern generator neurons on, 994 Liddell, E.G.T, 762 Lie detection, fMRI in, 125b Life span average human, 1561, 1562f genetic control of, 1564, 1566f research on extending, 1566 Ligand-gated channels, 132, 166. See also Glutamate receptors (receptorchannels); specific types energy for, 173–174 gene superfamily in, 177, 178f physical models of, 172–173, 173f refractory states in, 173 Light activation, of pigment molecules, 526f, 528–529, 528f, 529f Light adaptation, in retina. See Retina, light adaptation in Likely gene disrupting (LGD) mutations, 33f, 49 LIM homeodomain proteins, 1125f Limb ataxia, 909 Limb movements, cerebellum in learning of, 925, 926f Limb proprioception, mechanoreceptors for, 415t Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, 1437, 1439 Limbic system, 1050, 1051f Line label, 517, 517f Linear motion otolithic organ sensing of, 634–635 postural response to, 895–897 vestibulo-ocular reflex compensation for, 642–643

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1612

LIP. See Lateral intraparietal area (LIP)

Lipid bilayer, 165, 167, 168f–169f, 200

Lipoxygenases, on arachidonic acid, 310

Lis1 mutations, 1136f–1137f, 1138 Lisman, John, 1348 Lissencephaly, neuronal migration in, 1136f–1137f, 1138 Lithium, for bipolar disorder, 1519 Llinás, Rodolfo, 327, 327f, 1461 Lloyd, David, 411, 412t Local field potentials, in brain-machine interfaces, 954 Local interneurons, 64, 64f Local sleep, 1091 Localization auditory, in owls, 1227–1228, 1227f–1229f in brain, language processing and, 16–20 immunohistochemical, of chemical messengers, 372b–374b, 372f, 373f of seizure focus, for epilepsy surgery, 1463–1465 of sound. See Sound, localization of ultrastructure, of chemical messengers, 373b–374b, 373f Locke, John, 387, 497 Lockhart, Robert, 1297 Locomotion, 783–812 basal ganglia in, 807–809 cerebellum on regulation and descending signals in, 806–807 computational network modeling of circuits in, 809 highlights, 811–812 human, 809–811, 810b locomotor system in, 783, 784f muscle activation pattern in, 786–789, 788f, 789f posterior parietal cortex in planning of, 806, 807f, 808f somatosensory inputs in modulation of, 795–799 mechanoreceptors in adjustment to obstacles, 798–799 proprioception on regulation of timing and amplitude, 795, 798, 798f, 799f spinal organization of motor pattern of, 790–795 central pattern generators in, 791–792 experience on, 792 flexor and extensor contraction in, 790–791, 790f rhythm- and pattern-generated circuits in, 792–795 flexor and extensor coordination, 793, 794f–795f interlimb coordination, 795 left-right coordination, 793, 794f–795f quadrupedal central pattern generator, 793, 794f–795f swimming central pattern generator, 792, 794f–795f spinal cord transection studies of, 790–792, 790f, 791f studies of, 783–785, 785b–787b, 786f–787f supraspinal structures in adaptive control of, 799–804

brain stem nuclei for posture regulation, 802–804 midbrain nuclei for initiation and maintenance, 800, 801f, 802f midbrain nuclei projection to brain stem neurons, 800–802, 801f visually guided, motor cortex in, 804–806, 805f Locus (gene), 30 Locus ceruleus in ascending arousal system, 1084, 1084f in attentiveness and task performance, 1005, 1005f firing patterns of, in sleep-wake cycle, 1001, 1001f Loewi, Otto, 180, 315, 316f, 359 Lømo, Terje, 284, 1342 Long arm, chromosome, 53 Long noncoding RNAs, 29 Longevity. See Life span Longitudinal fasciculus medial, lesions on eye movements, 869f, 870 superior, in language development, 1382 Long-term depression (LTD) after eye closure, on visual development, 1220 of auditory input to amygdala, 1334 behavioral role of, 1356f, 1357 in cerebellum, 1353 in drug addiction, 1075 of synaptic transmission, in memory, 1353, 1356f, 1357 Long-term memory. See Memory, explicit; Memory, implicit Long-term potentiation (LTP) AMPA receptors in, 1334 in amygdala, 1332–1333, 1333f definition of, 1350 in drug addiction, 1075 in fear conditioning, 1332–1333, 1333f gene expression in, 1333–1334 in hippocampus. See Hippocampus induction vs. expression of, 1345 NMDA receptors in, 284, 286f–287f, 1332–1333 in spatial memory. See Memory, spatial in synaptic plasticity, 351 Lou Gehrig disease. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) Lower motor neuron(s), 1426 Lower motor neuron disorders, 1426. See also Motor neuron diseases Low-pass behavior, 534b, 534f Low-pass spatial filtering, 534b, 534f Low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs), 420f–421f Low-voltage activated (LVA) Ca 2+ channels, 227

19/01/21 9:18 AM

L-pigment genes, on X chromosome,

539–540, 539f

LRRK2 mutations, 1549

LTD. See Long-term depression (LTD) LTP. See Long-term potentiation (LTP) L-type Ca 2+ channel, 329, 331t, 332 Lumbar spinal cord, 13f, 78–79, 78f Lumpkin, Ellen, 419 Lundberg, Anders, 778 Luria, Alexander, 1309 Lysosomes, 135, 136f M M cones, 525, 526f, 529, 538

M opsin, 528f

Machado-Joseph disease, 1546, 1548, 1549t

Machine learning networks, 103f MacKinnon, Rod, 180, 182 MacLean, Paul, 1049–1050 MacMahan, Jack, 349 Macula, hair cells, 634 MAG. See Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). See also Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) normal human brain, 15f for seizure focus localization, 1463 Magnetoencephalography, in language studies, 1370, 1381 Magnocellular layers, lateral geniculate nucleus, 501, 511f, 512, 514f Mahowald, M.W., 1095 Main olfactory epithelium (MOE), 1272, 1273f Major depressive disorder in childhood, 1503 environmental risk factors for, 1507–1508 epidemiology of, 1502 genetic risk factors for, 1506–1507 hippocampal volume decrease in, 1512 hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activation in, 1508–1509, 1508f neural circuit malfunction in, 1509–1511, 1511f vs. sadness or grief, 1502 suicide with, 1503 symptoms and classification of, 1502–1503, 1502t treatment of antidepressant drugs in. See Antidepressant drugs cognitive therapy in, 1474b electroconvulsive therapy in, 1518 ketamine in, 1515 neuromodulation in, 1518–1519, 1519f psychotherapy in, 1515, 1518 Major histocompatibility complex (MHC), schizophrenia risk and, 50, 1497 Malingering, 1485 Malinow, Roberto, 1346 Malleus

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1613

anatomy of, 599, 599f

in hearing, 601, 602f–603f

Mamiya, Ping, 1382

Mangold, Hilde, 1108–1110 Mania/manic episode, 1503–1504, 1503t. See also Bipolar disorder Map auditory, critical period for refinement of, 1227–1229, 1227f–1229f body surface, in dorsal root ganglia, 362 cognitive, 1288 cortical, protomap, 1123 of interaural time differences in medial superior olive, 657, 660–661f motor periphery, in primary motor cortex, 841, 842f neural. See Neural maps of sound location information in superior colliculus, 665, 666f spatial, in hippocampus. See Hippocampus, spatial cognitive maps in tonotopic, 604 MAP2 protein in dendrites, 1157, 1158f in hippocampal neuronal polarity, 1157, 1158f MAPKs. See Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs, MAP kinases) Mapping, for seizure focus localization in epilepsy, 1463 Marginal layer, of spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f Marijuana, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Márquez, Gabriel Garcia, 1291 Marr, David cerebellum in motor learning, 105, 923, 928 on hippocampal circuit for memory, 1340, 1359–1360 Marshall, John, 1475 Marshall, Wade, 19 Martin, Kelsey, 1324–1325, 1327 Mash1, in cerebral cortex, 1134–1135, 1141, 1143f, 1145, 1145f Mass action, theory of, 18 Match/nonmatch perceptual decision, 835 Maternal behavior in rodents, early experience on, 1274–1275, 1274f Math-1, 1145, 1145f Mating behavior in fruit fly, genetic and neural control of, 1266, 1268b, 1269f hypothalamic neural circuit on, 1272 Mauk, Michael, 925 Mauthner cell, 247 Maxillary palps, 692, 693f Maximal force, of muscle, 740, 742 Maximum entropy codes, 404 MBP (myelin basic protein), in demyelinating neuropathies, 1431f MC4R (melanocortin-4 receptor), 1036f–1037f, 1037–1038

McCarroll, Steven, 50

McCarthy, Gregory, 569

McCormick, David, 1461

M-cells, retinal ganglion, 523f, 531 MDS (MECP2 duplication syndrome), 1532 Meaney, Michael, 1274 Measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, autism spectrum disorder risk and, 1530–1531 Mechanical allodynia, 481 Mechanoreceptors activation of, 414–415, 416f, 471, 471f characteristics of, 391f, 392, 392t cutaneous. See Cutaneous mechanoreceptors dorsal root ganglia neuron axon diameter in, 410–412 ion channels in, 415–416, 416f, 417f mechanisms of action of, 424–425, 425f muscle, 415t rapidly adapting, 396, 397f rapidly adapting low-threshold, 419, 420f–421f skeletal, 415t slowly adapting, 396, 397f. See also Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers; Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers to spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f for touch and proprioception, 414–416, 415t, 416f, 417f MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS), 1532 MECP2 mutations, 1467, 1532 Medial, 11b, 11f Medial ganglionic eminences, neuron migration to cerebral cortex from, 1140f Medial geniculate nucleus, 82f, 83 Medial group, thalamic nuclei, 82f, 83 Medial intraparietal region (MIP) in control of hand and arm movements, 825, 826f–827f in decision-making, 1404f–1405f Medial lemniscus, 80f–81f, 81–82, 450, 450f–451f Medial longitudinal fasciculus lesions, on eye movements, 869f, 870 Medial nuclear group, nociceptive information relay to cerebral cortex by, 485 Medial premotor cortex, contextual control of voluntary actions in, 829–831, 830f Medial superior temporal area lesions, 878 Medial temporal lobe in autism, 1525f in encoding of visual events, 1298–1299, 1299f in episodic memory, 1294–1297, 1295f–1296f in implicit memory, 1303–1304 in memory storage, 1294, 1295f in visual memory, 577–578

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Index



Index

Medial vestibular nucleus, 636, 641f.

See also Vestibular nuclei

Medial vestibulospinal tract, in automatic

postural response, 902 Medial-lateral axis, of central nervous system, 11b, 11f Median preoptic nucleus (MnPO), 1014f, 1015 in body temperature control, 1030 in fluid balance, 1032, 1032f in sleep promotion, 1085–1086 in thirst drive, 1033 Medulla (oblongata) anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f, 15f breathing generation in, 995, 995f breathing regulation in, 996, 996f cranial nerve nuclei in, 967f Medullary pyramids, 89 Meissner corpuscles fiber group, name, and modality for, 415t in human hand, 438, 439f, 442f innervation and action of, 391f, 438, 441f RA1 fibers in. See Rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fibers in touch, 437–438, 437f, 438t MEK (mitogen-activated/ERK), 1150f Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R), 1036f–1037f, 1037–1038 Melanopsin, 992, 993f, 1090 Melzack, Ronald, 488 Memantine, 1577 Membrane, cell. See Cell (plasma) membrane Membrane capacitance, 203–204, 204f Membrane current (I
m m ), 213 Membrane potential (Vm m ), 190–201 highlights, 208–209 membrane capacitance and, 203–204, 204f neuron as electrical equivalent circuit and, 199–201. See also Equivalent circuit resting. See Resting membrane potential (Vr r ) in voltage clamp, 213, 214b Membrane resistance, 204–206, 205f Membrane time constant, 204 Membrane trafficking, in neuron, 142, 144f Membranous labyrinth, 630, 630f, 631 Membranous organelles, 135 Memory, 1291–1309. See also Learning age-related decline in, 1562, 1563f in Alzheimer disease. See Alzheimer disease autobiographical, 1367 cellular, 351 conscious recall of, 1482–1483, 1482f as creative process, 1482–1483 declarative. See Memory, explicit definition of, 1292 episodic. See Memory, episodic errors and imperfections in, 1308–1309

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1614

false, 1482–1483

fMRI studies of, 121–122

forgotten, imprint of, 1482, 1482f

highlights, 1309 hippocampus in. See Hippocampus immediate (working). See Memory, short-term nondeclarative. See Memory, implicit overall perspective of, 1287–1289 procedural. See Memory, implicit sleep and formation of, 1096 social, 1360 visual. See Visual memory Memory, episodic, 1294–1302 accuracy of, 1298b brain regions involved in, 124f contribution to imagination and goaldirected behavior, 1300, 1301f definition of, 1296 early work on, 1294 medial temporal lobe and association cortices interaction in, 1298–1300 medial temporal lobe in storage of, 1294–1297, 1295f processing of, 1297–1298 retrieval of, 1300, 1301f, 1482 Memory, explicit autobiographical, 1367 brain systems in transference of, 403, 1312–1313, 1313f conscious recall of, 1482 definition of, 1296, 1297 episodic. See Memory, episodic fMRI studies of, 121–122 semantic, 1296 storage of, 1339–1367 cell assemblies in, 1357–1358, 1358f–1359f highlights, 1367–1368 hippocampus in. See Hippocampus long-term depression of synaptic transmission in, 1353–1357, 1356f Memory, implicit, 1303–1308 associative vs. nonassociative, 1304–1306 brain systems in transference of, 403, 1312–1313, 1313f definition and properties of, 1296, 1297f fMRI studies of, 121–122 neural circuits in, 1303–1304 in perceptual learning, 1304 in sensorimotor skill learning, 1304 in statistical learning, 1303–1304 stimulus-reward learning and, 1304, 1305f storage of, synaptic transmission in, 1313–1319 habituation and presynaptic depression of, 1314–1315, 1315f, 1316f long-term habituation of, 1314, 1316f presynaptic facilitation of, in sensitization, 1316–1317,

1318f–1319f

short-term habituation of, 1314–1315, 1315f threat conditioning and, 1317, 1319, 1320f synaptic changes mediated by cAMPPKA-CREB pathway in long-term storage of, 1319–1330 cAMP signaling in long-term sensitization for, 1319, 1321f–1322f, 1323 facilitation of, in threat conditioning, 1317, 1319, 1320f noncoding RNAs in regulation of transcription in, 1323–1324, 1324f, 1325f presynaptic facilitation of, 1316–1317, 1318f–1319f prion-like protein regulator in maintenance of, 1327–1329, 1329f synapse specificity of, 1324–1327, 1326f, 1328f visual priming in, 1303, 1303f Memory, long-term explicit. See Memory, explicit implicit. See Memory, implicit Memory, procedural, 1482 Memory, semantic, 1296 Memory, short-term definition of, 1292 executive control processes in, 1292 prefrontal cortex in, 1292, 1293f selective transfer to long-term memory from, 1293–1294, 1295f transient representation of information for immediate goals in, 1292, 1293f for verbal information, 1292 for visuospatial information, 1292 Memory, spatial long-term potentiation and, 1350–1353 deficits in, reversibility of, 1351, 1355f Morris water maze for tests of, 1350, 1352f–1353f, 1354f NMDA receptors in, 1350–1351, 1352f–1353f, 1353, 1354f place cells as substrate for, 1365–1367, 1366f vestibular signals in orientation and navigation, 646–647 Memory storage. See also specific types of memory in different parts of brain, 1292 of episodic memory, 1297 hippocampus in, 1294, 1295f medial temporal lobe in, 1293–1294, 1295f Mendelian (simple) mutation, 33b Mendell, Lorne, 765 Mental processes. See Cognitive function/ processes

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Mental retardation, 1523

Mentalizing

brain areas used in, 1527, 1528f

studies of, 1525–1527, 1526f–1527f Merkel cells (Merkel disk receptor) fiber group, fiber name, and modality in, 415t in finger skin, 440b–441b in human hand, 437f, 438, 438t, 442f, 504f innervation and functions of, 417–419, 418f, 441f SA1 fibers in. See Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 1409 Merritt, Houston, 1448 Merzenich, M.M., 1229–1230 Mesaxon, 151, 152f Mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR), 800, 801f, 802f Mesencephalic reticular formation, in vertical saccades, 863f, 870 Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, 989f, 990 Mesencephalon, 1112, 1113f Mesial temporal sclerosis, in temporal lobe seizures, 1463 Mesoderm embryogenesis of, 1108, 1109f signals from, in neural plate patterning, 1112–1113, 1114f Messenger RNA (mRNA) definition of, 53 in dendritic spines, 146, 147f in genome translation, 27 in synaptic facilitation, 1327 Metabolic mapping, in seizure focus localization, 1463 Metabotropic receptors. See also specific types families of, 302, 302f G protein-coupled. See G proteincoupled receptors vs. ionotropic receptors, 251, 312–313, 312t, 313f, 314f mechanism of, 239, 250–251, 251f neurotransmitter activation of, 302–303, 302f physiologic actions of, 312, 312t receptor tyrosine kinase. See Receptor tyrosine kinases Metacognition, 1483–1484 Metarhodopsin II, 528–529 Methadone, 1072t mGluR5 (type 5 metabotropic glutamate receptor), 1531 MHC (major histocompatibility complex), schizophrenia risk and, 50, 1497 MHC (myosin heavy chain) isoforms, 741–742, 741f Mice. See Mouse models Microcephaly, in neurodevelopmental disorders, 1540 Microfilaments, 139, 140f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1615

Microglia

activation by peripheral nerve injury,

481, 484f

activation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 1428 functions of, 159–160, 160f, 1240 in schizophrenia, 1497, 1497f structure of, 160f in synapse elimination, 1206, 1207f Microneurography, 773 MicroRNA (miRNA) in gene transcription, 29 in memory consolidation switch, 1323–1324, 1324f Microsleeps, 1091 Microstimulation, 1400, 1400f Microtubule(s) in cytoskeleton, 139, 140f, 143f in fast axonal transport, 144 in kinocilium, 606 in neuron migration along glial cells, 1137, 1139f as organelle tracks, 141 in slow axonal transport, 146–147 structure of, 136f, 139, 141 Microtubule-associated protein kinase (MAPK), 1148, 1150f Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) in cytoskeleton, 139 in neurofibrillary tangles, 1573–1574, 1574f Microvilli, taste cell, 697, 697f Micturition reflex, 1023, 1024f Midbrain. See also specific structures anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 15f in ascending arousal system, 1084, 1084f embryogenesis of, 1112, 1113f input from basal ganglia, 939–940 in locomotion, 800–802, 801f, 802f patterning of, isthmic organizer signals in, 1113–1115, 1114f, 1115f signals to basal ganglia, 939 Midbrain-hindbrain boundary, 1114, 1114f Middle cerebellar peduncle, 925 Middle ear cavity, 599, 599f Middle temporal area, in visual processing, 504f–505f, 505 Middle temporal area lesions, 878 Midget bipolar cell, 536, 537f Midline crossing, of spinal neuron axons, 1176–1179 chemoattractant and chemorepellent factors on, 1176–1179, 1178f netrin direction of commissural axons in, 1176, 1177f, 1178f Midline nuclei, of thalamus, 82f, 83 Midline vermis, 925 Migraine P/Q-type Ca 2+ channel mutation in, 332 treatment of, 1004 Migration, chain, 1140, 1140f Migration, neuronal Index


glial cells as scaffold for excitatory

cortical neurons, 1137–1138, 1138f,

1139f

inside-out, 1139f integrins in, 1137 of interneurons, 1138–1139, 1140f in lissencephaly, 1138, 1139f of neural crest cells in peripheral nervous system, 1141, 1142f, 1143f Ramón y Cajal, Santiago on, 1137 tangential, 1138–1140, 1140f Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 1566, 1567f Miledi, Ricardo on Ca 2+ influx in transmitter release, 327 on presynaptic terminal depolarization in transmitter release, 324–326, 325f–326f Mill, James, 404 Mill, John Stuart, 382, 404 Miller, Christopher, 162b Miller, Earl, 573, 575 Mills, Deborah, 1381–1382 Milner, Brenda, 1293, 1340 Milner, David, 1488 Milner, Peter, 1066 Mind brain and, 1419–1420 definition of, 7 science of, 4 Mind blindness, 1525–1527 Miniature end-plate potential, 332–333 Miniature synaptic potentials, spontaneous, 334f MIP. See Medial intraparietal region (MIP) Mirror neurons, 838, 839f Misattribution, 1308 Mishkin, Mortimer, 402 Miss, in decision-making, 1395 Missense mutations, 33b Mitochondria, 31 DNA in, 31 function of, 135 origins of, 135 structure of, 136f Mitochondrial dysfunction, on neurodegenerative disease, 1556 Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs, MAP kinases) activation of, 308–309, 309f in long-term sensitization, 1321f, 1323 Mitogen-activated/ERK (MEK), 1150f Mitosis, in embryonic brain cells, 1131 Mitral cell, 683f, 688, 690, 690f Miyashita, Yasushi, 578 MK801, on NMDA receptor, 277f, 283 MLR (mesencephalic locomotor region), 800, 801f, 802f MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine, autism spectrum disorder risk and, 1530–1531 MnPO. See Median preoptic nucleus (MnPO) Mobility, of ions, 167

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Modafinil, for narcolepsy, 1095

Model-based reinforcement, 734

Modular processing, in brain, 21–22

Modulatory synaptic actions, 313f MOE (main olfactory epithelium), 1272, 1273f Molaison, Henry, 94, 1293–1294 Molecular layer, of cerebellum, 918, 919f Molecular organizers, in presynaptic specialization, 1192, 1193f Moment arm, 50, 754f Monoamine oxidase (MAO), 1513–1514 Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, 375, 1514, 1516f–1517f Monoaminergic neurons. See Brain stem, monoaminergic neurons in Monoaminergic pathways ascending, 998, 1004–1006, 1005f, 1006f. See also Ascending arousal system descending, 488–489, 489f, 998 motor activity facilitation by, 1004 pain modulation by, 1002, 1004 Monoamines. See also specific monoamines on motor neurons, 745, 746f structure and functions of, 360t, 361–364 Monocular crescent, 502f Monogenic epilepsies, 1467, 1468f Monosynaptic pathways, in stretch reflex, 716, 762–765, 763f, 773f Monoubiquitination, 149 Montage, EEG electrode, 1451f Mood and anxiety disorders, 1501–1521. See also Anxiety disorders; Bipolar disorder; Major depressive disorder environmental factors in, 1507–1508 fMRI in, 1509–1511, 1510f genetic risk factors in, 1506–1507 highlights, 1520–1521 hippocampal volume decrease in, 1512 neural circuit malfunction in, 1509–1512, 1510f–1511f Mood stabilizing drugs, 1519–1520 Morgan, Thomas Hunt, 31 Morphemes, 1372 Morphine. See also Drug addiction pain control mechanisms of, 489f, 490–493, 492f source and molecular target of, 1072t Morris, Richard, 1327, 1348 Morris water maze, 1350, 1352f–1353f, 1354f Moser, Edvard, 99 Moser, May-Britt, 99 Mossy fiber pathway, 1340, 1341f, 1342, 1343f Mossy fibers, in cerebellum information processing by, 105, 918–920, 920f synaptic reorganization of, 1469, 1470f Motion. See also Locomotion; Voluntary movement angular, postural response to, 895–896 of basilar membrane, 602f–603f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1616

body, ambiguous information from

somatosensory inputs for, 897, 898f

horizontal, postural response to, 895–897

linear. See Linear motion

neurons sensitive to, successive central synapses for, 460, 461f Pacinian corpuscle detection of, 445f, 446 perception of, bottom-up processes in, 555 rapidly adapting fibers for detection of. See Rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fibers; Rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fibers Motion correction, in fMRI, 116 Motion sickness, sensory information mismatch in, 898 Motion-sensitive neurons, 460, 461f Motivational states on goal-directed behavior, 1111–1114 brain reward circuitry in, 1066–1068, 1067f dopamine as learning signal in, 1068–1069, 1069f internal and external stimuli in, 1065–1066 regulatory and nonregulatory needs in, 1066 highlights, 1078 pathological. See Drug addiction Motor apparatus, cerebellar internal model of, 922 Motor commands. See Sensorimotor control; Voluntary movement Motor coordination. See also specific types cerebellum in, 925–927, 926f–927f for locomotion. See Locomotion in muscle movement, 755–758, 755f–757f Motor cortex, primary. See Primary motor cortex Motor equivalence, 726, 727f Motor homunculus, 84–85, 84f Motor imagery, 837 Motor learning. See Motor skill learning Motor molecules, for fast axonal transport, 144 Motor nerve terminal, differentiation of, 1190–1192, 1193f, 1194f Motor neuron(s), 1120 alpha, 764b conduction velocity of, 1425, 1425f death and survival of, 1147, 1148f definition of, 59 development of subtypes of, 1119–1123 ephrin signaling in, 1122, 1125f Hox genes and proteins in, 1120–1121, 1122f–1124f rostrocaudal position on, 1120–1121, 1121f, 1125f transcriptional circuits with, 1121– 1123, 1124f–1125f Wnt4/5 signals in, 1122 electrically coupled, simultaneous firing of, 247–248, 249f function of, 1120

functional components of, 64, 64f

gamma. See Gamma motor neurons

in innervation number, 739, 739t input-output properties of, 745, 746f lower, 1426 monoamines on, 745, 746f, 1004 in motor units, 737–738, 738f in NMJ postsynaptic muscle membrane differentiation, 1192f, 1194–1196, 1195f size of, on recruitment, 743–744, 744f in spinal cord, 76, 77f structure of, 136f upper, 1426 visceral, in autonomic system, 1015–1016 Motor neuron diseases, 1426–1428 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) lower, 1426 poliomyelitis, 1428 progressive spinal muscular atrophy, 1428 upper, 1426 Motor periphery map, 841, 842f Motor plans. See Sensorimotor control Motor pools, 1120, 1124f Motor predominant neuropathy, 1433t Motor primitives, 734 Motor signals, in reflex action, 68, 69f. See also Sensorimotor control, motor signal control in Motor skill learning in cerebellum, 923–929 climbing fiber activity on synaptic efficacy of parallel fibers in, 924–925, 924f deep cerebral nuclei in, 928–929, 928f of eye-blink response, 108, 109f, 925 in eye-hand coordination, 925, 926f new walking patterns, 928 saccadic eye movements/adaption, 925, 927, 927f vestibular plasticity in, 108–109 vestibulo-ocular reflex, 643, 644f, 925, 927f network functional connectivity changes during, 1304 in primary motor cortex, 852, 854–856, 854f, 856f sensorimotor control of. See Sensorimotor control, of motor learning Motor skills, age-related decline in, 1341 Motor systems. See Locomotion; specific systems Motor unit, 737–745 actions of, 1421–1422 components of, 737–739, 738f definition of, 737, 1421 force of, action potential rate on, 739–742, 740f highlights, 758

19/01/21 9:18 AM

innervation number of, 739, 739t

in muscle contraction, 738–739

on muscle force, 742–745, 743f, 744f

properties of physical activity on, 741f, 742 variation in, 739–742, 741f Motor unit diseases differential diagnosis of, 1423–1426, 1423t types of, 1422, 1422f. See also Motor neuron diseases; Myopathies; Neuromuscular junction disorders; Peripheral neuropathies Motor-error signals, 855, 856f Mountcastle, Vernon on cortical organization, 452 on perceptual decisions, 1395–1396 on sensorimotor circuits in parietal cortex, 463 on sensory thresholds and neural responses, 395 on visual neurons response to position of eye in orbit, 587 Mouse models jimp, 94b, 156b of neurodegenerative diseases, 1552–1553, 1553f, 1554f ob/ob, 1035 reeler, 1136f–1137f targeted mutagenesis in, 35b–36b, 36f totterer, 1463, 1467f, 1468 transgene introduction in, 39b, 39f trembler, 155b, 155f Wlds, 1238, 1238f, 1239f Movement. See also specific types and systems control of. See also Sensorimotor control; Voluntary movement in cerebellum. See Cerebellum, movement control by in cerebral cortex. See Primary motor cortex coordination of motor system components in, 89, 91f, 714–715, 714f in locomotion, posterior parietal cortex in, 806, 807f, 808f decoding of. See Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs), movement decoding in directional selectivity of, 554, 555f guidance of, dorsal visual pathways in, 505 local cues for, in object and trajectory shape, 554–555 muscle. See Muscle, movement of overall perspective of, 709–711 speed–accuracy trade-off in, 727–728, 728f Movement field, 872 Movement-related neurons, 875, 876f Moving objects, retinal output and, 531, 533f, 534b–535b

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1617

retinal ganglion cell representation of,

531, 533f

spatiotemporal sensitivity of human

perception in, 531, 534b–535b, 535f Moving stimuli, in visual processing, 549 Movshon, J. Anthony, 390b, 1397 M-pigment genes, on X chromosome, 539–540, 539f MPZ (Myelin protein zero), 156b Mrg protein family, 472 MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) mRNA. See Messenger RNA (mRNA) mTOR inhibitors, 1469 mTOR pathway, in axon regeneration, 1246–1247, 1248f M-type K + channel, 313, 314f, 315, 1468f Mu (μ) receptors, opioid, 489, 490, 490t Mueller, Paul, 162b Müller, Johannes, 8, 390 Müllerian duct differentiation, 1262, 1263f Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), 1262, 1263f Müller's muscle, innervation of, 863 Multimodal association cortex, 88, 89f Multiple sclerosis compound action potential in, 414 demyelination in, 208 postural responses in, 892, 892f Multiple Sleep Latency Test, 1086–1087, 1095 Multipolar neurons, 59, 60f Multivariate pattern analysis, in fMRI, 117f, 118–119 Munc13, 344f, 349, 351 Munc18, 344f, 346, 346f Muscarine-sensitive K + channel, 313, 314f Muscarinic ACh receptors, 255, 1021t Muscle. See also specific muscles and actions anatomy of fiber number and length in, 750–754, 753f on function, 750–754, 752f in human leg muscles, 752–754, 753t sarcomeres in, 750–752 types of arrangements in, 750–752, 752f contraction of, 762 flexion reflex in, 763f muscle spindles in, 764b, 765f sensory fibers in, 762, 766b, 766t stretch reflex in, 762, 763f fiber types in, 1188, 1189f force of. See Muscle force mechanoreceptors in, 415t movement of, 754–758 contraction velocity variation in, 751f, 754–755, 754f muscle coordination in, 755–758, 755f, 756f pattern of activation in, 758, 793f Index


proprioceptors for activity of, 421–422,

422f

sensory fibers from, classification of, 766t

stiffness of, 749 synergistic activation of, for posture, 890f synergy of, 756 torque of, 754, 754f types of, 1421 Muscle biopsy, 1423t, 1425 Muscle fibers on contractile force, 747–749, 751f contractile properties of, 741–742, 741f, 742f extrafusal, 764b innervation number of, 739, 739t intrafusal, 421, 422f, 764b, 765f myosin adenosine triphosphatase assay of, 741 myosin heavy chain isotopes in, 741–742, 741f number and length of, 752, 753f, 753t properties of, variation in, 739–742, 740f, 741f Muscle field, 844 Muscle force, 745–754 highlights, 758–759 motor unit control of, 742–745, 743f, 744f muscle structure on, 745–754 contractile force in, 747–749, 751f noncontractile elements in, structural support from, 747, 748f–749f sarcomere contractile proteins in, 745–747, 748f–750f torque and muscle geometry in, 750– 754, 752f–754f Muscle signals, in reflex action, 69f Muscle spindles, 62 afferent activity in reinforcement of central commands for movement, 773–775, 775f gamma motor neurons on sensitivity of, 766–767, 769f, 770f intrafusal fibers in, 421, 422f, 764b, 765f in proprioception, 421–422, 422f structure and function of, 764b–765b, 765f Muscular dystrophies, 1422–1423, 1437–1441 Becker, 1437, 1438t, 1440f–1441f DMD mutation in, 1437, 1439, 1440f–1441f Duchenne, 1436–1439, 1440f–1441f dysferlin in, 1439, 1442f genetic defects in, 1437t inheritance of, 1437 limb-girdle, 1437, 1439 myotonic, 1439, 1443f Mushroom bodies, 693f, 694, 1330 MuSK (muscle-specific trk-related receptor with a kringle domain) in ACh receptor action at synaptic sites, 1194, 1195f, 1196 antibody to, in myasthenia gravis, 1433, 1435

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Mutagenesis

chemical, 35b

random, in flies, 35b

site-directed, 177 targeted, in mice, 35b–36b, 37f Mutations. See also specific types and disorders definition of, 53 dominant, 32 generation of, in animal models, 35b– 36b, 36f genetic diversity and, 32, 33b recessive, 32 Mutism, 829b Myalgia, 1422 Myasthenia gravis, 1433–1436 ACh receptors in, 267, 1433–1435, 1435f antibodies in, 1435 autoimmune, 1433 congenital, 1433, 1435–1436 ptosis in, 1433, 1433f synaptic transmission failure in, 1433–1435, 1434f thymus tumors in, 1434 treatment of, 1435 Mydriasis, oculomotor nerve lesion in, 864b Myelin, 57f, 58 age-related changes in, 1563 axon insulation by, 152f, 153f, 154 in closing of critical period for monocular deprivation, 1223, 1224f defects in in demyelinating neuropathies, 1431f. See also Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease on nerve signal conduction, 154, 155b–157b, 155f–157f on neurite outgrowth, 1244–1245, 1244f, 1245f proteolipid protein in, 156b Schwann cells on, after axotomy, 1240 structure of, 154 Myelin basic protein (MBP), in demyelinating neuropathies, 1431f Myelin protein zero (MPZ or P 0 ), 156b Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) on axon regeneration, 1245, 1245f in nerve signal conduction, 155b–156b Myelination on action potential propagation velocity, 208, 208f in central nervous system, 152f, 153f in peripheral nervous system, 152f, 153f restoration of, oligodendrocyte transplantation for, 1255, 1255f Myocardial infarction, referred pain in, 474, 476f Myofibril, 745, 748f–749f Myoglobinuria, 1422 Myopathies (primary muscle diseases), 1422 characteristics of, 1437 dermatomyositis, 1437

differential diagnosis of, 1422–1426,

1423t, 1424f, 1425f

inherited

muscular dystrophies. See Muscular dystrophies myotonia congenita, 1444–1445, 1444f periodic paralysis. See Periodic paralysis voltage-gated ion channel genetic defects in, 1441–1442, 1443f vs. neurogenic diseases, 1423–1426, 1423t, 1424f, 1425f Myosin in actin filaments, 141 in growth cone, 1163f, 1164, 1165f in hair bundles, 614 in thick filaments, 745, 748f–749f Myosin adenosine triphosphatase, 741 Myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoforms, 741–742, 741f Myotome, 429 Myotonia, 1422, 1443f, 1444f Myotonia congenita, 1444–1445, 1444f Myotonic dystrophy, 1439, 1443f N Na + channels resting, multiple, in cell membrane, 201 resting potential, 195, 196f structure of, 167, 168f–169f voltage-gated in action potential. See Voltage-gated ion channels, in action potential genetic factors in diversity of, 177, 178f, 225–227 genetic mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467, 1468f inactivation of in periodic paralysis, 1441–1444, 1443f during prolonged depolarization, 217–219, 219f interdependence of K + channel with, 212–213, 214b–215b ion conduction in, 261 Na + selection criteria of, 222, 224 opening/closing of, charge redistribution in, 220–222, 223f persistent Na + current in, 231, 232f recovery from inactivation of, 220, 221f in seizures, 1455–1456 Na + current inward, 219 persistent, 231, 232f voltage-gated, on conductance, 217–219, 218b, 218f–219f Na + equilibrium potential, 198–199 Na + -Ca 2+ exchanger, 197f, 198 N-acylation, 148 Nadel, Lynn, 1361 Nader, Karim, 1330

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1618

Na

Na

+

+

-K

-K

+

+

pump (Na

+

-K

+

195–198, 197f

-Cl

-

cotransporter, 197f, 198

Narcolepsy, 1085, 1093–1095, 1094f Nav1 gene family, 226, 228, 472 NCAM, in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f Near response, 880 Nebulin, 747, 748f–749f Necker cube, 1476, 1476f Necrosis, 1151 Negative feedback, in voltage clamp, 214b–215b, 214f Negative reinforcement, 1308 Neglect spatial, 1475, 1475f, 1477 unilateral, 505, 1475, 1475f, 1477 visual. See Visual neglect Neher, Erwin, 162b, 171, 260, 329 Neocortex Brodmann's areas of, 87, 87f columnar organization of, 88 layers of, 85–86, 85f–87f in sensorimotor skill learning, 1304 Neospinothalamic tract, 485 Neostigmine, on myasthenia gravis, 1434 Nernst equation, 194 Nernst potential, 194 Nerve block, from demyelination, 1430 Nerve cells. See Neuron(s) Nerve growth factor (NGF) in neurotrophic factor hypothesis, 1147, 1148f, 1149f in pain, 478, 479, 481f receptors for, 1150–1151, 1150f Nerve-muscle synapse. See Neuromuscular junction (NMJ, end-plate) Nerve-stimulation tests, axon size on, 207 Netrins in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f commissural axon direction by, 1176, 1177f, 1178f conservation of expression and action of, 1176, 1178f in growth cone attraction or repellent, 1166f in presynaptic differentiation, 1203f Neural activity decoding, 99 estimating intended movements from, 960–962, 960f, 961f, 962f–963f integrated, recurrent circuitry for, 105–107, 106f measurement of, 97–98, 97b, 98b, 957 sensory information encoded by, 98 in sharpening of synaptic specificity, 1187–1188, 1188f, 1189f Neural circuit(s). See also Neuron(s), signaling in convergent, 63, 63f, 102f, 103 development of, 1103–1104 divergent, 63, 63f, 102f, 103

ATPase), 65,

19/01/21 9:18 AM

experience and modification of, 71

feedback, 63f, 64

feedforward, 63–64, 63f, 102–103,

102f knee-jerk reflex and, 62, 62f knowledge of, importance of, 4, 7–8 mediation of behavior by, 4, 62–64. See also Neural circuit(s), computational bases of behavior mediation by; Neural circuit(s), neuroanatomical bases of behavior mediation by for memory-based goal-directed behavior, 1300, 1302f motifs, 102–107, 103f recurrent, 102f, 103, 105–107, 106f in stretch reflexes, 62–64 Neural circuit(s), computational bases of behavior mediation by, 97–110 in complex behavior, 70–71 highlights, 110 methods of study, 97–98, 98b, 99b neural circuit motifs, 102–107, 102f neural firing patterns, 98–102, 100f–101f synaptic plasticity, 107–109, 108f. See also Synaptic plasticity Neural circuit(s), neuroanatomical bases of behavior mediation by in complex behaviors hippocampal system connections in memory, 93–95, 93f, 94f, 95f. See also Hippocampus local circuits for neural computations, 74, 75f, 76f cortical-spinal cord connections for voluntary movement, 89, 90f, 91f. See also Primary motor cortex modulatory systems on motivation, emotion, and memory, 89, 92 peripheral nervous system in, 92–93, 92f sensory information circuits in, 73–81. See also Somatosensory cortex/system anterolateral system in, 80f–81f central axon terminals and body surface map in, 81 culmination in cerebral cortex. See Cerebral cortex, in sensory information processing dorsal column–medial lemniscal system, 75f, 80–81f dorsal root ganglia, 79–81, 79f, 80f. See also Dorsal root ganglia highlights, 95 spinal cord, 76–79, 77f, 78f. See also Spinal cord submodality processing in, 81–82 thalamus as link between sensory receptors and cerebral cortex in, 82–84, 82f. See also Thalamic nuclei Neural coding. See also Sensory coding; Sensory neurons

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1619

study of, 388–390

in visual processing, 517–518, 517f

Neural commitment, 1377

Neural correlates of consciousness, 1475–1476 Neural crest cells definition of, 1141 migration from neural tube, 1117f, 1119 migration in peripheral nervous system, 1141, 1142f, 1143f Neural decoding, in brain-machine interfaces, 954 Neural firing patterns in hippocampal spatial maps, 98–102 information decoded from, 98 in sensory information encoding, 98 Neural groove, 1108 Neural induction. See Induction, neural Neural maps experience on, 1335f, 1336 somatotopic, of neuron cortical columns, 454–456, 454f–455f Neural networks artificial, 404–405 integration in, 105–107, 106f in mood and anxiety disorders, 1509, 1510f Neural plate cells in, 1130–1131 development of competence in, 1108 earliest stages of, 1108 induction factors and surface receptors in, 1108, 1110–1112 organizer region signals in, 1108–1110, 1110f neural tube formation from, 1108, 1109f Neural progenitor cells expansion in humans and other primates, 1141–1143, 1144f radial glial cells as. See Radial glial cells symmetric and asymmetric division in proliferation of, 1131, 1132f Neural prostheses. See Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) Neural science, overall perspective of, 3–4. See also specific topics Neural tube development of brain stem, 986–987, 986f dorsoventral patterning in, 1115–1119 bone morphogenetic proteins in, 1119 conservation of mechanisms along rostrocaudal neural tube in, 1114f, 1118 homogenetic induction in, 1116–1117 mesoderm and ectodermal signals in, 1116 sonic hedgehog protein in, 1117–1119, 1118f spinal cord neurons in, 1116, 1117f formation from neural plate, 1108, 1109f regionalization in, 1112, 1113f rostrocaudal patterning in, 1112–1115

Index


inductive factors in, 1112

mesoderm and endoderm signals in,

1112–1113, 1114f

organizing center signals in, 1113–1115, 1114f, 1115f repressive interactions in hindbrain segmentation, 1115, 1116f Neurexin-neuroligin interactions, 1199–1203, 1202f, 1203f Neurexins, in presynaptic differentiation, 1199–1203, 1202f, 1203f Neurite outgrowth, myelin in inhibition of, 1244–1245, 1244f, 1245f Neuroactive peptides. See Neuropeptide(s) Neuroanatomical tracing, axonal transport in, 145b, 145f Neurodegenerative diseases. See also specific diseases animal models of invertebrate, 1553 mouse, 1552–1553, 1553f epidemiology of, 1544 hereditary, 1544–1545 highlights, 1558 neuronal loss after damage to ubiquitously expressed genes in, 1550–1552, 1551f pathogenesis of, 1553–1556 apoptosis and caspase in, 1556 mitochondrial dysfunction in, 1556 overview of, 1556, 1557f protein misfolding and degradation in, 1553–1555, 1555f protein misfolding and gene expression alterations in, 1555–1556 sporadic, 1544 treatment of, 1556–1567 Neurodevelopmental disorders 15q11-13 deletion in, 1533–1534, 1533f 22q11 deletion in, 48, 50, 1492 Angelman syndrome, 1533–1534, 1533f autism spectrum disorders. See Autism spectrum disorders fragile X syndrome, 47, 1531 genetic factors in, 46–48 Prader-Willi syndrome, 1533–1534, 1533f Rett syndrome. See Rett syndrome social cognition mechanisms insight from, 1534 Williams syndrome, 47, 1532 Neuroendocrine cell, 64, 64f Neuroendocrine system. See Hypothalamus, neuroendocrine system of Neurofascin, 1187, 1187f Neurofibrillary tangles, in Alzheimer disease. See Alzheimer disease (AD), neurofibrillary tangles in Neurofilament heavy polypeptide (NFH), 411f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Neurofilaments

in slow axonal transport, 147

structure of, 136f, 139, 140f

Neurogenesis in adult mammalian brain, 1249–1250, 1250f, 1251f in mood disorders, 1512 recent research on, 1237 stimulation of, in regions of injury, 1253 throughout adulthood, 1359–1360 Neurogenic inflammation, 479, 480f Neurogenins in cerebral cortex, 1134–1135, 1143f, 1146f in neural crest cell migration, 1141, 1143f Neurohypophysis. See Posterior pituitary gland Neurokinin-1 (NK1) receptor, activation of, 477f, 482f Neuroligins mutations of, in autism spectrum disorder, 49, 1534–1535 in presynaptic differentiation, 1199–1203, 1202f, 1203f Neuromodulators multiple, convergence on same neuron and ion channels, 320, 321f properties of, 319 Neuromuscular junction (NMJ, end-plate) acetylcholine receptors at. See Acetylcholine (ACh) receptors axon growth cones at, 1190, 1191f calculating current of, from equivalent circuit, 269–271, 269f–270f cell types of, 1189 chemical driving force in, 261–262 current. See End-plate current development of, 1189–1190, 1191f, 1192f maturation of, steps of, 1197–1198, 1199f motor nerve terminal differentiation in, 1190–1192, 1193f, 1194f postsynaptic muscle membrane differentiation in, 1192f, 1194–1196, 1195f postsynaptic potential at. See End-plate potential presynaptic and postsynaptic structures of, 255, 256f synaptic differentiation at, 1189–1198 acetylcholine receptor gene transcription in, 1196–1197, 1197f cell types in, 1189 maturation in, steps of, 1197–1198, 1199f synaptic signaling at, 255, 256f, 258f Neuromuscular junction disorders, 1432–1437 botulism, 1436–1437 categories of, 1433 differential diagnosis of, 1422–1426, 1423t, 1424f, 1425f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1620

Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 332,

1436–1437

myasthenia gravis. See Myasthenia

gravis Neuron(s), 56–61, 133–151. See also specific types afferent, 59 asymmetry of, 133 axonal transport in. See Axonal transport axons of, 57–58, 57f basic features of, 56–57, 131–132 beating, 68 bipolar, 59, 60f bursting, 68 cell body (soma) of, 57, 57f chattering, 229, 230f connections of, 56, 102–103, 102f cortical, origins and migration of, 1137–1140, 1140f cytoplasm of, 136f cytoskeleton of, 139–141 death of, 1237, 1562–1563 definition of, 131 dendrites of. See Dendrites development of, 1103–1105 diameter of in dorsal root ganglia, 410–411 on length constant, 205 in peripheral nerve, 410–412, 412f, 412t variation in, 205 differentiation of, 1103–1104, 1130–1131 cerebral cortex layering in, 1135–1138, 1136f–1137f delta-notch signaling and basic helixloop-helix transcription factors in, 1131–1135, 1134f, 1135f highlights, 1153–1154 neural progenitor cell proliferation in, 1131, 1132f neurotransmitter phenotype plasticity in, 1143, 1145–1147, 1145f, 1146f radial glial cells in, 1131, 1133f. See also Radial glial cells direction-sensitive, 1398, 1399f, 1400, 1400f efferent, 59 as electrical equivalent circuit. See Equivalent circuit endocytic traffic in, 150–151 excitability. See Excitability, of neurons fast-spiking, 230f, 231 generation of. See Neural progenitor cells highlights, 162 integration of, 291–292 interneurons. See Interneurons membrane trafficking in, 142, 144f molecular level differences in, 68–69 motor, 59 multipolar, 59, 60f myelin of, 57f, 58 neurotransmitter release by, 131–132 nodes of Ranvier in, 57f, 58 organelles of, 136f overall perspective of, 131–132

overproduction of, 1147

passive electrical properties of, 201–208

axial (axonal) resistance, 202–203, 205, 205f axon size and excitability, 206–207 membrane and cytoplasmic resistance, 204–206, 205f, 206f membrane capacitance, 203–204, 204f myelination and axon diameter, 206f, 207–208, 208f polarity of, 1157, 1158f, 1159f polarization of, 131 postsynaptic astrocytes and, 158f, 159 characteristics of, 57f, 58 inhibitory current effect in, 294, 295f presynaptic astrocytes and, 158f, 159 characteristics of, 57f, 58 propriospinal, 778, 778f protein synthesis and modification in, 147–150, 148f pseudo-unipolar, 59, 60f quantity of, in brain, 56 secretory properties of, 131–132 sensory, 59, 61f signaling in, 64–69, 132. See also specific types action potential in, 57–58, 58f, 65–67, 66f, 67t in complex behavior, 70–71 depolarization and hyperpolarization in, 65 dynamic polarization in, 64f functional components of, 64, 64f ion channels in, 65 Na + -K + pump in, 65 neuron type on, 68 output component in, 68 rapid, ion channels in, 166 receptor potential in, 65–66, 66f, 67t resting membrane potential in, 64 sensory to motor transformation in, 68, 69f signal types in, 64 synaptic potential in, 66–67, 67t trigger zone in, 66f, 67 structural and molecular characteristics of, 133–139, 135f survival of, 1147–1153 Bcl-2 proteins in, 1151–1152, 1151f caspases in, 1152–1153, 1152f cell death (ced) genes in, 1151, 1151f highlights, 1153–1154 nerve growth factor and neurotrophic factor hypothesis in, 1147, 1148f, 1149f, 1150f neurotrophic factors and, 1149f, 1151–1153, 1151f, 1152f neurotrophins in, 1147–1151, 1150f, 1151f sustained, 531, 532f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

synapses of, 57f, 58

synaptic cleft of, 57f, 58

synaptic connections to, number of, 241

synaptic input to, ion gated channels on response to, 229, 231, 232f transplantation of, 1252–1253, 1252f types of, 133 unipolar, 59, 60f Neuron doctrine, 8, 58 Neuron progenitor transplantation, 1252–1254, 1252f–1254f Neuropathic pain, 474, 481, 483f Neuropathies, peripheral. See Peripheral neuropathies Neuropeptide(s) (neuroactive peptides), 359, 367–371. See also specific types behavior coordination by, 44–45 categories and actions of, 367–368, 367t in dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 477f families of, 368, 368t packaging of, 359 processing of, 368–370, 369f on sensory perception and emotions, 368 vs. small molecule neurotransmitters, 370–371 in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475–476, 478f synthesis of, 367–368 Neuropeptide receptors, in social behavior regulation, 45f, 46f Neuropeptide Y, 1020f, 1021t Neuropsychology, 16 Neurostimulator, for seizure detection and prevention, 1459b, 1459f Neurotechnology, for brain-machine interfaces. See Brainmachine interfaces (BMIs), neurotechnology for Neurotransmitters, 358–377. See also specific types action of, 359 astrocytes on concentrations of, 154, 158f vs. autacoids, 359 autonomic, 1021t at chemical synapses, 249–250, 249f criteria for, 359 definition of, 248, 359 highlights, 376–377 history of, 358–359 vs. hormones, 359 identification and neuronal processing of, 371, 372b–374b, 372f–374f ionotropic receptor activation by, 301–302, 302f long-term effects of, 317, 319f metabotropic receptor activation by, 302–303, 302f neuroactive peptides. See Neuropeptide(s) neuronal, phenotype plasticity of, 1143, 1145–1147 neuronal target signals in, 1146–1147, 1146f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1621

transcription factors in, 1143, 1145,

1145f

organelles with, 68

postsynaptic receptor on action of, 249–250 receptor interaction of, duration of, 359 release of, action potentials in, 66f, 68 short -term effects of, 319f small-molecule. See Small-molecule neurotransmitters spontaneous firing of neurons and, 231 synaptic cleft removal of, on transmission, 256f, 371 targets of, 359 transporter molecules for, 275 transporters, 345 vesicular uptake of, 364–365, 366f volume transmission of, 935 Neurotrophic factor(s). See also specific types in apoptosis suppression, 1151–1153, 1151f, 1152f discovery of, 1147, 1149f initial theories on, 1147, 1148f nerve growth factor as, 1147, 1149f neurotrophins as, 1147–1151, 1149f. See also Neurotrophin(s) Neurotrophic factor hypothesis, nerve growth factor in, 1147, 1148f Neurotrophin(s) in neuron survival, 1147–1151, 1149f, 1150f in pain, 479 brain derived neurotrophic factor, 479, 481f nerve growth factor, 476, 479, 481f receptors for, 1148, 1150–1151, 1150f types and functions of, 1150–1151, 1150f Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), 1148, 1149f, 1150f Neurulation, 1108, 1109f Neville, Helen, 1382 Newborns brain stem activity in, 981 sleep in, 1092 Newsome, William, 390b, 1396, 1398 Newton's law of acceleration, in muscle movement, 755f Newton's law of action and reaction, in muscle movement, 757 NFH (neurofilament heavy polypeptide), 411f NGF. See Nerve growth factor (NGF) Nialamide, 790 Nicotine, 1007, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Nicotinic ACh receptors, 255 antibodies to, in myasthenia gravis, 1433, 1435 functions of, 1021t genetic mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467 structure of high-resolution models of, 266f, 267–268, 268f low-resolution models of, 264–267, 265f, 266f Index studies of, 258f Night blindness, stationary, 530

Night terrors, 1096

Night vision, rods in, 526, 526f Nitric oxide (NO) autonomic functions of, 1021t in long-term potentiation, 1344f–1345f, 1347 precursor of, 360t as transcellular messenger, 310 NK1 (neurokinin-1) receptor, activation of, 477f, 482f NLGN3X/4X mutations, 49, 1535 N-linked glycosylation, 149 NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)type glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) biophysical and pharmacological properties of, 283–284, 283f in central pattern generator function, 796b contributions to excitatory postsynaptic current, 283–284, 285f in dorsal horn neuron excitability in pain, 479, 482f in dorsal nucleus neurons of lateral lemniscus, 664 excitatory synaptic action regulation by, 277, 277f gene families encoding, 278–279, 278f in long-term depression of synaptic transmission, 1353, 1356f, 1357 in long-term potentiation at hippocampal pathways, 1342–1345, 1344f–1345f, 1360 long-term synaptic plasticity and, 284, 286f–287f in neuropsychiatric disease, 284–287 NR1 subunit of, in spatial memory, 1350–1351, 1353f postsynaptic density in, 281–283, 282f in seizures, 1455, 1455f structure of, 134–135, 279 voltage in opening of, 283 NMNAT1/2, 1238, 1239f NO. See Nitric oxide (NO) Nociception. See Pain Nociception-specific neurons, 474 Nociceptive pain, 474 Nociceptors, 415t action potential propagation by class of, 471f Aδ fiber, 424–425, 425f C fiber, 425 classes of, 471–472, 471f definition of, 424 dorsal root ganglia neuron axon diameter in, 410–412 mechanical. See Mechanoreceptors pain. See Pain nociceptors polymodal. See Polymodal nociceptors thermal, 471, 471f, 474, 475f Nocturnal epilepsy, 1460

19/01/21 9:18 AM
synapses of, 57f, 58

synaptic cleft of, 57f, 58

synaptic connections to, number of, 241

synaptic input to, ion gated channels on response to, 229, 231, 232f transplantation of, 1252–1253, 1252f types of, 133 unipolar, 59, 60f Neuron doctrine, 8, 58 Neuron progenitor transplantation, 1252–1254, 1252f–1254f Neuropathic pain, 474, 481, 483f Neuropathies, peripheral. See Peripheral neuropathies Neuropeptide(s) (neuroactive peptides), 359, 367–371. See also specific types behavior coordination by, 44–45 categories and actions of, 367–368, 367t in dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 477f families of, 368, 368t packaging of, 359 processing of, 368–370, 369f on sensory perception and emotions, 368 vs. small molecule neurotransmitters, 370–371 in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475–476, 478f synthesis of, 367–368 Neuropeptide receptors, in social behavior regulation, 45f, 46f Neuropeptide Y, 1020f, 1021t Neuropsychology, 16 Neurostimulator, for seizure detection and prevention, 1459b, 1459f Neurotechnology, for brain-machine interfaces. See Brainmachine interfaces (BMIs), neurotechnology for Neurotransmitters, 358–377. See also specific types action of, 359 astrocytes on concentrations of, 154, 158f vs. autacoids, 359 autonomic, 1021t at chemical synapses, 249–250, 249f criteria for, 359 definition of, 248, 359 highlights, 376–377 history of, 358–359 vs. hormones, 359 identification and neuronal processing of, 371, 372b–374b, 372f–374f ionotropic receptor activation by, 301–302, 302f long-term effects of, 317, 319f metabotropic receptor activation by, 302–303, 302f neuroactive peptides. See Neuropeptide(s) neuronal, phenotype plasticity of, 1143, 1145–1147 neuronal target signals in, 1146–1147, 1146f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1621

transcription factors in, 1143, 1145,

1145f

organelles with, 68

postsynaptic receptor on action of, 249–250 receptor interaction of, duration of, 359 release of, action potentials in, 66f, 68 short -term effects of, 319f small-molecule. See Small-molecule neurotransmitters spontaneous firing of neurons and, 231 synaptic cleft removal of, on transmission, 256f, 371 targets of, 359 transporter molecules for, 275 transporters, 345 vesicular uptake of, 364–365, 366f volume transmission of, 935 Neurotrophic factor(s). See also specific types in apoptosis suppression, 1151–1153, 1151f, 1152f discovery of, 1147, 1149f initial theories on, 1147, 1148f nerve growth factor as, 1147, 1149f neurotrophins as, 1147–1151, 1149f. See also Neurotrophin(s) Neurotrophic factor hypothesis, nerve growth factor in, 1147, 1148f Neurotrophin(s) in neuron survival, 1147–1151, 1149f, 1150f in pain, 479 brain derived neurotrophic factor, 479, 481f nerve growth factor, 476, 479, 481f receptors for, 1148, 1150–1151, 1150f types and functions of, 1150–1151, 1150f Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), 1148, 1149f, 1150f Neurulation, 1108, 1109f Neville, Helen, 1382 Newborns brain stem activity in, 981 sleep in, 1092 Newsome, William, 390b, 1396, 1398 Newton's law of acceleration, in muscle movement, 755f Newton's law of action and reaction, in muscle movement, 757 NFH (neurofilament heavy polypeptide), 411f NGF. See Nerve growth factor (NGF) Nialamide, 790 Nicotine, 1007, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Nicotinic ACh receptors, 255 antibodies to, in myasthenia gravis, 1433, 1435 functions of, 1021t genetic mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467 structure of high-resolution models of, 266f, 267–268, 268f low-resolution models of, 264–267, 265f, 266f Index studies of, 258f Night blindness, stationary, 530

Night terrors, 1096

Night vision, rods in, 526, 526f Nitric oxide (NO) autonomic functions of, 1021t in long-term potentiation, 1344f–1345f, 1347 precursor of, 360t as transcellular messenger, 310 NK1 (neurokinin-1) receptor, activation of, 477f, 482f NLGN3X/4X mutations, 49, 1535 N-linked glycosylation, 149 NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)type glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) biophysical and pharmacological properties of, 283–284, 283f in central pattern generator function, 796b contributions to excitatory postsynaptic current, 283–284, 285f in dorsal horn neuron excitability in pain, 479, 482f in dorsal nucleus neurons of lateral lemniscus, 664 excitatory synaptic action regulation by, 277, 277f gene families encoding, 278–279, 278f in long-term depression of synaptic transmission, 1353, 1356f, 1357 in long-term potentiation at hippocampal pathways, 1342–1345, 1344f–1345f, 1360 long-term synaptic plasticity and, 284, 286f–287f in neuropsychiatric disease, 284–287 NR1 subunit of, in spatial memory, 1350–1351, 1353f postsynaptic density in, 281–283, 282f in seizures, 1455, 1455f structure of, 134–135, 279 voltage in opening of, 283 NMNAT1/2, 1238, 1239f NO. See Nitric oxide (NO) Nociception. See Pain Nociception-specific neurons, 474 Nociceptive pain, 474 Nociceptors, 415t action potential propagation by class of, 471f Aδ fiber, 424–425, 425f C fiber, 425 classes of, 471–472, 471f definition of, 424 dorsal root ganglia neuron axon diameter in, 410–412 mechanical. See Mechanoreceptors pain. See Pain nociceptors polymodal. See Polymodal nociceptors thermal, 471, 471f, 474, 475f Nocturnal epilepsy, 1460

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Index

Nodes of Ranvier

action potential propagation at, 207, 208f,


structure of, 57f, 58, 151–152, 153f Noebels, Jeffrey, 1463 Noggin, 1111f, 1112 Nogo on critical period for monocular deprivation, 1223, 1224f inhibition of axon regeneration by, 1245, 1245f Noise, in sensory feedback, 714–715, 714f Noisy evidence, in decision-making, 1397–1400, 1399f, 1400f Non–24-hour sleep–wake rhythm disorder, 1090 Nonassociative learning, 1304–1306 Noncoding RNAs, in memory consolidation switch, 1323–1324 Nondeclarative memory. See Memory, implicit Nonneuronal cell transplantation, 1255, 1255f Non-NMDA receptors. See AMPA receptors; Kainate receptors Nonregulatory needs, motivational states for, 1066 Non-REM sleep ascending arousal system pathways in, 1085–1086, 1087f, 1088f EEG of, 1081, 1081f parasomnias in, 1095–1096 physiologic changes during, 1082 Nonsense mutations, 33b Nonsilent synapses, 1346–1347 Nonspecific nuclei, of thalamus, 83 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on COX enzymes, 478 on fever, 1031 Nonsynchronized neurons, in auditory cortex, 672, 672f Noradrenergic neurons in ascending arousal system, 1084, 1084f on attentiveness and task performance, 1005, 1005f location and projections of, 998, 999f motor neuron responses and, 1004 in pain perception, 1004 in pons and medulla, 1513, 1514f Norepinephrine in autonomic system, 1019, 1021t, 1022f, 1146, 1146f on motor neurons, 745, 746f neuronal activity on production of, 362b as neurotransmitter, 361 receptors, 1021t synthesis of, 361, 1513, 1514f Norepinephrine transporter (NET), 366f Normalization, 400

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1622

Notch signaling, in neuronal and glial

production, 1131–1135, 1134f,

1135f

Notch-Intra, 1134f Notochord, 1109f, 1116, 1117 Noxious information, pain nociceptors for, 471–474. See also Pain nociceptors Npy2r, 410, 411f NR1 subunit of NMDA receptor, in spatial memory, 1350–1351, 1353f NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) NSF, 346f, 347 NSS (sodium symporters) , 275, 375–376 NT-3 (neurotrophin-3), 1148, 1149f, 1150f N-type Ca 2+ channel, 329, 331t, 332 Nuclear envelope, 136f, 137 Nuclear import receptors (importins), 137 Nucleic acid hybridization, mRNA detection via, 373b Nucleoporins, 137 Nucleus accumbens neurons, 1077 Nucleus ambiguus, 989f, 991, 994 Nucleus of solitary tract (NTS) functional columns of, 989f, 990 in gastrointestinal reflexes, 994 in relay of visceral sensory information, 990, 1023, 1025f, 1026f Nucleus raphe magnus, in pain control, 488, 489f Numa, Shosaku, 265 Numb, in neurogenesis, 1134–1135 Nystagmus, 640 optokinetic, 643 right-beating, 640 vestibular, 642, 642f O Obesity, 1034. See also Energy balance, hypothalamic regulation of Object recognition attention in, 560–562

categorical, in behavior simplification, 572–573, 574f cognitive processes in, 560–562 feedforward representations in, 103–104, 103f figure vs. background in, 497, 498f in high-level visual processing, 565, 566f inferior temporal cortex in, 565–570 associative recall of visual memories in, 578–579, 579f clinical evidence for, 566–568, 567f cortical pathway for, 565–566, 566f cortical projections of, 566f, 570 face recognition in, 569–570, 570f functional columnar organization of neurons in, 568–569, 568f, 569f neurons encoding complex visual stimuli in, 568, 568f posterior and anterior divisions of,

565, 566f

perceptual constancy in, 571, 572f

visual memory on, 573 Object shape, local movement cues in, 554–555 Object-vector cell, 1362 ob/ob mice, 1035 Observer model, of state estimation, 722, 722f Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). See also Anxiety disorders basal ganglia dysfunction in, 947f, 949 risk factors for, 1507 treatment of, 1515, 1518 Obstructive sleep apnea, 1092, 1093, 1093f Occipital cortex/lobe anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f functions of, 16 in visual priming for words, 1303, 1303f Octopus cells, 655–656, 658f–659f Ocular counter-rolling reflex, 643 Ocular dominance columns brain-derived neurotrophic factor on, 1223 electric activity and formation of, 1215–1218, 1218f experimental induction of, in frog, 1218, 1219f inputs from eyes to, 1214, 1214f modification of critical period for, 1231 plasticity of, critical period for, 1220, 1221f sensory deprivation and architecture of, 1214–1215, 1216f, 1217f structure of, 508–509, 510f–511f synchronous vs. asynchronous optic nerve stimulation on, 1218 Oculomotor nerve (CN III) in extraocular eye muscle control, 863, 863f, 982 lesions of, 864b origin in brain stem, 983f projections of, 1019 skull exit of, 984f Oculomotor neurons for eye position and velocity, 867, 868f neural activity in, 105–106, 106f in saccades, 587, 589f sympathetic, 864b Oculomotor nucleus, 969, 989f Oculomotor proprioception, 586–587, 587f, 588f Oculomotor system function and structure of, 860 vestibular nuclei connection to, 636, 637f Odorants. See also Olfaction definition of, 683 detection by humans, 682 receptors for combinations encoding, 685–686, 686f in mammals, 684–685, 685f OFF cells, 530–531, 536 Off-center receptive fields, 506, 508f Ohmic channel, 171f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Ohm's law

in action potential, 211

axoplasmic resistance and, 207

in contribution of single neuron to EEG, 1452b–1453b in equivalent circuit, 200 in single ion channels, 171 Ojemann, George, 19 O'Keefe, John, 99–100, 1360, 1361 Olausson, Håkan, 419 Olds, James, 1066 Olfaction, 682–695 acuity in, 691 anatomy of, 683–684, 683f, 684f. See also Olfactory bulb behavior and, 691–695 evolution of strategies for, 695–696 odor coding and, invertebrate, 691–694, 693f pheromone detection in, 691, 692f stereotyped, nematode, 694–695, 695f, 696f disorders of, 690 evolution of strategies for, 695 in flavor perception, 702 highlights, 703–704 information pathways to brain in. See Olfactory bulb; Olfactory cortex odorant detection by, breadth of, 682 overall perspective of, 382 sensory neurons in. See Olfactory sensory neurons sexually dimorphic patterns of, 1280f, 1281 Olfactory bulb glomeruli in, 687–688, 687f, 689f interneurons in, 687f, 688 neurogenesis in, 1249, 1251f odorant coding in. See Olfactory sensory neurons sensory inputs to, 687–688, 687f, 689f transmission to olfactory cortex by, 688–690, 690f Olfactory cortex afferent pathways to, 688–690, 690f areas of, 688 definition of, 688 output to higher cortical and limbic areas from, 690–691 Olfactory sensory neurons odorant receptors in, 684–685, 685f, 1184–1185 in olfactory bulb, 687–688, 687f in olfactory epithelium, 686–687, 687f receptors encoding odorants in axon targeting of, 688, 1185–1186, 1185f combinations of, 685–686, 686f expression of guidance and recognition molecules in, 1186f structure of, 391f, 683–684, 683f, 684f Oligodendrocyte(s) functions of, 134, 151 generation of, 1132–1134, 1132f, 1136f loss of, after brain injury, 1255

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1623

structure of, 134, 134f

transplantation of, for myelin restoration,

1255, 1255f

Oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein (OMgp), 1245, 1245f Oliver, George, 358 Olivocochlear neurons, 662–663, 663f Olson, Carl, 571 Omnipause neurons, 869–870, 869f ON cells, 530–531, 536 On-center, off-surround response, 506, 508f On-center receptive fields, 506, 508f Onuf's nucleus, 1278 Open channels. See also specific channels in glial cell, K + permeability of, 191f, 193–194, 194f in resting nerve cells, ion conductance in, 194–195, 196f Open-loop control, 716–717, 717f Operant conditioning, 1306–1307 Opioid receptors, 489–490, 490t Opioids/opiates classes of, 489–490, 491f as drug of abuse, 1074. See also Drug addiction endogenous, 489–490, 491f mechanism of action of, 490–493, 492f peptides of, 368t side effects of, 491 source and molecular target of, 1072t tolerance and addiction to, 493. See also Drug addiction Opsin, 528, 528f, 529 Optic chiasm axonal crossing in, 1176 growth cone divergence at, 1171–1172, 1172f, 1173f Optic disc, 522f, 523–524 Optic nerve (CN II) origin in brain stem, 983f signaling pathways regulating axon regeneration in, 1246–1247, 1248f skull exit of, 1030f Optic radiation, 501, 503f Optical neuroimaging, 98b Optimal feedback control, 817f, 818 Optimal linear estimator, 962 Optogenetic methodology in manipulation of neuronal activity, 99b in research on emotions in animals, 1049 in research on reinforcement, 945 Optokinetic eye movements in image stabilization, 866 with vestibulo-ocular reflexes, 643 Orbit, eye rotation in, 860–861 Orbitofrontal cortex lesions, 690 Orexins, in narcolepsy, 1094–1095, 1094f Organ of Corti. See also Hair bundles; Hair cells anatomy of, 600f cellular architecture of, 605f in hearing, 604–606 Organelles Index axonal transport of, 143, 145b membranous, 135

Organizer region, on neural plate

development, 1108–1110, 1110f Organizing center signals, in forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain patterning, 1113–1115, 1114f, 1115f Orientation cerebellum in, 901–902 to environment, visual inputs for, 896f, 897 local, computation of, 545 postural. See Posture, postural orientation in sensory signals in internal models for optimization of, 898, 899f sexual, 1261 touch, neurons sensitive to, 460, 461f Orientation columns, in primary visual cortex, 508, 510f–511f Orientation selectivity, 547–548, 548f Orientation tuning, 399 Orientation-sensitive neurons, 460, 461f Orofacial movements, pattern generators in, 994 Orphanin FQ receptor, 489, 490t Orthologous genes, 32, 34f, 52 Osmolarity, blood, 1031 Osmoreceptors, 392, 1031–1033, 1032f Ossicles anatomy of, 599, 599f in hearing, 601, 602f–603f Otitis media, 601 Otoacoustic emissions, 616f, 617–618 Otoconia, 635, 635f Otolith organs anatomy of, 630f, 632 linear acceleration on, 634–635, 635f Otolithic membrane, 634, 635f Otosclerosis, 601 Otx2, 1114, 1114f Oval window, 600f OVLT. See Vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) Owls, auditory localization in, 690, 1227–1228, 1227f–1229f Oxycodone, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Oxytocin functions of, 1027, 1275 hypothalamic neurons on release of, 1027, 1028f on maternal bonding and social behaviors, 1275 on social behavior, 45 synthesis of, 1027 P P elements, 35b, 39b P 0 (myelin protein zero), 156b P2X receptor genes coding for, 291 structure of, 291 in threat conditioning in flies, 1330

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Index

Pacemaking, by neurons, 231

Pacinian corpuscle

fiber group, name, and modality for, 415t

in human hand, 438–439, 439f, 442f in motion and vibration detection, 439, 446, 447f RA2 fibers in. See Rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fibers in touch, 416, 437f, 438t Pain, 470–494 control of, endogenous opioids in, 489–490 classes and families of, 490t, 491f history of, 489 mechanisms of, 490–493, 492f tolerance and addiction in, 493. See also Drug addiction definition of, 470 first, 471f, 472, 490 gate control theory of, 488, 488f highlights, 493–494 hyperalgesia in. See Hyperalgesia illusory, in cerebral cortex, 487b, 487f neuropathic, 474, 481, 483f nociceptive, 474 perception of, 408 cortical mechanisms in, 485–489 cingulate and insular areas, 485–486, 487b, 487f convergence of sensory modalities, 488, 488f descending monoaminergic pathways, 488–489, 489f stimulation-produced analgesia, 488 monoaminergic modulation of, 1002, 1004 nociceptors in. See Pain nociceptors spinothalamic system in, 450f–451f, 470–471, 484, 485f thalamic nuclei in, 484–485, 486f TRP receptor-channels in, 472, 473f persistent, 470, 474 prostaglandins in, 478 referred, 474, 476f second, 471f, 472, 490 spontaneous, 481 tissue inflammation in, 476 Pain nociceptors, 69, 415t, 424–425, 425f activation of, 471–474, 471f, 473f mechanical. See Mechanoreceptors polymodal. See Polymodal nociceptors sensitization of. See Hyperalgesia signal transmission by to dorsal horn neurons, 474–476, 475f, 476f, 477f in hyperalgesia. See Hyperalgesia opioids on, 490–491, 492f silent, 472, 474, 475f thermal, 471, 471f, 474, 475f Painful stimuli, 470 Pair-bonding in mammals, differences in, 45, 46f Paired-association task, 576b, 576f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1624

Palay, Sanford, 8

Paleospinothalamic tract, 485

Palsy, 1428

Panic attacks/disorder, 997, 1505–1506. See also Anxiety disorders Papez, James, 1048–1049, 1049f Papez circuit, 1049, 1049f Papillae, taste bud, 697, 697f Papillary ridges, of finger, 440b–441b, 440f Par proteins, in neuronal polarity, 1157, 1158f Parabrachial complex, 1006 Parallel fibers and pathways on Purkinje cells, 920, 920f synaptic efficacy of, 924–925, 924f Parallel processing, in visual columnar systems, 512, 513f Paralysis. See also specific injuries and disorders periodic. See Periodic paralysis sleep, 1094, 1095 Paramedian pontine reticular formation lesions, on eye movements, 870 Paranoid delusions, 1490 Paraphasias, 18, 1384 Parasomnias, 1095–1096 Parasympathetic division, autonomic system, 1016, 1017f Parasympathetic ganglia, 1017f, 1018–1019 Paraventricular nucleus, hypothalamus, 1027, 1027f. See also Hypothalamus Paravertebral ganglia, 1017–1018, 1017f, 1018f Parental behavior, hypothalamus in control of, 1013t, 1041 Parentese, 1377–1378 Paresthesias, 1428, 1430. See also Peripheral neuropathies Parietal cortex/lobe active touch on sensorimotor circuits of, 463–464 anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f, 16 function of, 12b, 16f lesions/injuries deficits in use of sensory information to guide action in, 824b tactile deficits from, 464, 465f visual neglect in, 589–591, 591f in locomotion, 806, 807f, 808f posterior, 452f priority map of, 591b–592b, 591f, 592f temporoparietal, in postural control, 905 visual information to motor system from, 592–595, 594f, 595f voluntary movement control in, 823–828 areas active when motor actions of others are observed, 837–840, 839f areas for body position and motion for, 824–825 areas for spatial/visual information for, 825–827, 826f–827f. See also Lateral intraparietal area (LIP)

areas supporting, 819, 820f

aspects shared with premotor cortex,

840, 840f

internally generated feedback in, 827–828 sensory information linked to motor action in, 824, 824b visual receptive field expansion in, 827, 828f Parietal reach region (PRR), 825, 826f–827f, 832f Parkinson disease, 1548–1549, 1550t clinical features of, 948, 1548, 1550t early-onset, 48 epidemiology of, 1548 gait problems in, 808 genetics of, 1548–1549, 1550t mouse models of, 1552–1553, 1554f pathophysiology of basal ganglia dysfunction in, 947f, 948 dopamine deficiency in, 70, 361, 948 Lewy bodies in, 141b, 142f, 1553, 1554f neuronal degeneration in, 1004, 1007, 1550, 1551f protein misfolding and degradation in, 1553–1554 postural responses in, 892 spinocerebellum and adaptation of posture in, 902, 903f, 904f treatment of dopamine replacement therapy for, 1556 embryonic stem cell grafts for, 1252, 1252f type 17, tau gene in, 1573 types of, 1548–1549, 1550t Parkinsonism, autosomal recessive juvenile, 1549 Parkinson-like side effects, of antipsychotics, 1498 Paroxetine, 1515, 1516f–1517f Paroxysmal activity, 1450 Paroxysmal depolarizing shift, 1153 Partial seizures. See Seizure(s), focal onset Partner choice in mice, pheromones on, 1272, 1273f Parvocellular layers, lateral geniculate nucleus, 501, 511f, 512, 514f Parvocellular neuroendocrine zone, of hypothalamus, 1027f, 1028 PAS domain, 40 Passive electrical properties, of neuron. See Neuron(s), passive electrical properties of Passive touch, 436–437 Patapoutian, Ardem, 416, 421 Patch-clamp studies of ACh receptor channel current, 260, 261f of ion channel molecules, 220, 222f of NMDA receptors, 283, 283f of single ion channels, 170b, 170f whole-cell, 215, 215f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

patched, 1118

Pattern completion, 1360

Pattern generators. See also Central pattern

generators (CPGs)

in breathing, 994–998, 995f–997f in stereotypic and autonomic behaviors, 992, 994 Pattern separation, 1359–1360 Patterning, in nervous system, 1107–1129 diversity of neurons in, 1115 in forebrain. See Forebrain, patterning of highlights, 1128 local signals for functional neuron subclasses in. See Motor neuron(s), development of subtypes of neural cell fate promotion in, 1108–1110 competence in, 1108 induction factors in, 1108 organizer region signals in neural plate development, 1108–1109, 1110f peptide growth factors and their inhibitors in, 1110–1112, 1111f surface receptors in, 1108 in neural tube. See Neural tube development Pavlov, Ivan on classical conditioning, 1306 on fear, 1316 holistic view of brain, 18 Pavlovian conditioning, 1050–1051, 1306. See also Classical conditioning Pax6, in forebrain patterning, 1123, 1126f P-cells, retinal ganglion, 523f, 531, 538 PCP (phencyclidine), on NMDA receptor, 277f, 283 PDZ domains, 281, 1199, 1201f Pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN), 800, 802f, 808–809 Pegs, of synaptic vesicle, 349, 350f Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, 156b Pendular reflexes, 909 Penetrance, genetic, 32 Penfield, Wilder on conscious experiences from cortical stimulation, 1477 on cortical areas for language processing, 19 on motor functions in cerebral cortex, 841 on seizures, 1448, 1461, 1463 on somatosensory cortex, 84 Penicillin epilepsy, generalized, 1461 Pennation angle, muscles, 752–754, 753t Peptidases, 368 Peptide growth factors, in neural induction, 1110–1112, 1111f Peptide Y (PYY), 1034, 1036f–1037f PER, 40–41, 43f per gene, 40, 41f, 43f Perani, Daniela, 1380 Perception. See also specific types categorical, 1373

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1625

in behavior simplification, 572–573,

574f

in language learning, 1373

overall perspective of, 381–383 relationship to other brain functions, 383 sensory coding in. See Sensory coding sensory processing for, 724–725, 725f visual. See Visual perception Perceptive field, 397 Perceptual constancy, in object identification, 571, 572f Perceptual discrimination threshold, 518 Perceptual discriminations/decisions decision rules for, 1393–1395, 1394f involving deliberation, 1395–1397, 1396f, 1397f probabilistic reasoning in, 1404–1408, 1407f Perceptual fill-in, illusory contours and, 545–546, 546f Perceptual learning, 559, 561f Perceptual priming, 1303 Perceptual task, 562 Perforant pathway, 1340, 1341f, 1342, 1343f Periaqueductal gray (matter) analgesia from stimulation of, 488 in ascending arousal system, 1084, 1084f in autonomic function, 1025, 1026f in freezing behavior, 1052 in learned fear response, 1053, 1060, 1061f opioids on, 489f, 490 Perilymph, 604, 605f, 630f, 631 Perineuronal net, on critical period for monocular deprivation, 1223, 1231 Period gene, 1088–1090, 1089f Periodic limb movement disorder, 1095 Periodic paralysis, 1441–1444, 1443f gene mutations in, 1444f hyperkalemic, 1442–1444, 1443f hypokalemic, 1442, 1444f Peripheral feedback theory, 1048, 1049f Peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), 156b, 156f, 157f Peripheral nerve(s) atrophy of, 1422 diseases of. See Peripheral neuropathies injury of central sensitization and, 481, 483f microglia activation after, 481, 484f regeneration after, 1241–1242, 1241f, 1243f sensory fiber classification in by compound action potentials, 412–413, 412f by diameter and conduction velocity, 410–412, 412f, 412t Peripheral nerve and motor unit diseases, 1421–1445 differential diagnosis of, 1422–1426, 1423t, 1424f, 1425f highlights, 1445 motor neuron diseases. See Motor neuron diseases Index


myopathies. See Myopathies

neuromuscular junction disorders. See

Neuromuscular junction disorders

peripheral neuropathies. See Peripheral neuropathies Peripheral nervous system autonomic division of, 92f, 93 in behavior, 92–93 neural crest cell migration in, 1139f, 1141, 1142f, 1143f somatic division of, 92–93, 92f Peripheral neuropathies, 1428–1430. See also specific disorders acute, 1429–1430 axonal, 1430, 1432f, 1433t chronic, 1430 demyelinating, 1430, 1433t. See also Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease differential diagnosis of, 1423–1426, 1423f, 1424f, 1425f sensorimotor control in, 733b, 733f symptoms of, 1428–1430 Permeability. See also specific ions and receptors of blood–brain barrier, 159 of cell membrane. See Cell (plasma) membrane, structure and permeability of Peroxisomes, 135 Persistence, 1308–1309 PET. See Positron emission tomography (PET) Petit mal seizure. See Typical absence seizures Pettito, Laura-Anne, 1382 Phalangeal cells, 604 Phantom limb, 1481 Phantom limb pain neural activation in, 485, 486f neuropathic pain in, 474 Pharmacology, history of, 8–9 Phase-dependent reflex reversal, 799 Phase-locking, 657, 660f–661f, 671 Phasic mode, of locus ceruleus neurons, 1005, 1005f Phencyclidine (PCP), on NMDA receptor, 277f, 283 Phencyclidine-like drugs, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Phenelzine, 1514, 1516f–1517f Phenotype definition of, 53 genotype and, 31–32 Phenylketonuria (PKU), 46 Phenytoin, 1455–1456 Pheromones definition and functions of, 691 olfactory structures detecting, 691, 692f on partner choice in mice, 1272, 1273f perception of, 1280f, 1281 Phobias, 1504, 1506, 1515, 1518 Phonemes, 1371 Phonemic paraphasia, 18, 1384

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Phonetic prototypes, 1374

Phonetic units, 1371

Phonotactic rules, 1372

Phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3 kinase) pathway, 1148, 1150f Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), 305, 307f, 315 Phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3 kinase), 1329f Phosphoinositol system, steps of, 305 Phospholipase A2, 305, 310, 311f Phospholipase C, 305, 307f, 309f Phospholipase D, 305 Phospholipids in cell membranes, 166–168, 168f–169f phospholipase A2 hydrolysis of, on arachidonic acid, 310, 311f phospholipase C hydrolysis of, IP3 and diacylglycerol from, 305–308, 307f Phosphorylation cAMP-dependent, in K + channel closing, 317, 318f cGMP-dependent, 312 in posttranslational modification, 149 of rhodopsin, 526f–527f, 529–530 Phosphorylation consensus sequences, 303 Phosphorylation-gated channel, physical models of, 172, 173f Photoreceptor(s) characteristics of, 391f, 392t, 393 density of, visual resolution and, 397– 398, 399f graded sensitivity of, 393–395, 394f horizontal cells in, 524f, 536–537 in retina, 521–522, 522f ribbon synapse in, 536 Photoreceptor layers, retinal, 522–526 ocular optics on retinal image quality in, 522–524, 522f, 525f rods and cones in, 524–526, 525f, 526f Phototransduction, in retina. See Retina, phototransduction in Phox2, 1143f Phrenic nerve, 995f Phrenology, 10, 16, 21 PI3 kinase (phosphoinositide 3 kinase), 1329f PI3 kinase (phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase) pathway, 1148, 1150f PIB (Pittsburgh compound B), 1576, 1576f Piezo protein family, 416, 417f, 421, 472 Pigment, visual genes for, 539–540, 539f light activation of, 526f, 528–529, 528f, 529f PIH (prolactin release-inhibiting hormone), 1029t Pillar cells, 604, 605f, 607f Piloerection, 1029 PIP2 (phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate), 305, 307f, 315 Pitch perception, 673–674, 674f Pittsburgh compound B (PIB), 1576, 1576f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1626

Pituitary gland. See Anterior pituitary

gland; Posterior pituitary gland

PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), 1323,

1324f PKA. See Protein kinase A (PKA) PKC. See Protein kinase C (PKC) PKG (cGMP-dependent protein kinase), 312 PKM (protein kinase M), 307f PKM ζ (PKM zeta), 1344f–1345f, 1348 PKU (phenylketonuria), 46 Place cells hippocampal, 99–100, 100f, 1360–1361, 1362f as substrate for spatial memory, 1365–1367, 1365f Place code, 624 Place fields disruption of, 1366, 1366f hippocampal, 99–101, 100f, 1360–1361, 1362f, 1363f Placebo, responses to, 493 Plane of fixation, 550, 552f Planes, of central nervous system, 11b, 11f Plasma membrane. See Cell (plasma) membrane Plasmalemma, 134–135 Plasmapheresis definition of, 1430 for myasthenia gravis, 1435 Plasticity circuit, 1077 cortical in adults, 559, 560f learning on, 1335f, 1336 in perceptual learning, 559, 560f of nervous system dendritic spines in, 1221, 1222f early experience and, 1210–1212, 1213f hypothesis, 71 short-term, 350, 352f–353f. See also Synaptic plasticity of neuronal excitability, 233. See also Excitability, of neurons of neurotransmitter phenotype, 1143, 1145–1147, 1145f, 1146f of ocular dominance columns, 1220, 1221f synaptic. See Synaptic plasticity whole-cell, 1077 Plastin, 604 Plateau potentials, 796b Plato, on decision-making, 1393 Plato's Cave, 381 Pleasure, neural basis of, 1055, 1062 PLP (proteolipid protein), 156b PM. See Premotor cortex (PM) PMd. See Dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) PMP22 gene mutations, 156b, 1431f, 1434 PMv. See Ventral premotor cortex (PMv) Pneumotaxic center, 997 POA. See Preoptic hypothalamus (POA) Poeppel, David, 1379

Point mutations, 33f

Polarization, neuron, 131

Poliomyelitis, 1428

Polygenic risk scores, in mood and anxiety disorders, 1507 Polyglutamine diseases. See CAG trinucleotide repeat diseases Polymodal nociceptors activation of, 471, 471f mechanisms of action of, 425 to spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f Polymorphism definition of, 32, 53 single nucleotide, 53 Polyproteins, 368, 369f Polysomes, structure and function of, 136f Polysomnogram, 1080–1081, 1081f Polysynaptic pathways in flexion reflex, 763f in stretch reflex, 767–769 POMC. See Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) Pons anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f, 15f, 1428 in smooth-pursuit eye movements, 867f, 878–879, 878f Pontifical cell, 518 Pontine flexure, 1112, 1113f Pontine micturition center (Barrington's nucleus), 1023, 1024f Pontine respiratory group, 997 Pontine reticular formation, in horizontal saccades, 868–870, 869f Pontomedullary reticular formation, in locomotion, 802–803, 803f, 804f Pop-out phenomenon, 559–560, 562f Population codes, 395–396, 517, 517f Population vectors, 849, 850f, 962 Position constancy, in object identification, 571, 572f Positive emotions, neural basis of, 1055, 1062 Positron emission tomography (PET) of amyloid plaques, 1576, 1576f in cue-induced cocaine craving, 1071, 1073f in language studies, 1370 for seizure focus localization, 1463–1464 in studies on emotion, 1060 Postcentral gyrus, 12, 17f Posterior group, thalamic nuclei, 82f, 83 Posterior hypothalamus, 1013 Posterior pituitary gland hormones of, 367t, 368t hypothalamic control of, 1027, 1027f, 1028f Postganglionic neurons, 1016, 1016f Post-herpetic neuralgia, 474 Post-ictal period, 1449 Postsynaptic cell domain, synaptic inputs directed to, 1186–1187, 1187f Postsynaptic density, in NMDA and AMPA receptors, 281–283, 282f Postsynaptic inhibition, 353 Postsynaptic muscle membrane differentiation, 1192f, 1194–1196, 1195f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Postsynaptic neuron. See Neuron(s),

postsynaptic

Post-tetanic potentiation, 351, 352f–353f

Posttranslational modification, of protein, 148–149 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) causes of, 1506. See also Anxiety disorders hippocampal volume in, 1512 symptoms of, 1506 Postural equilibrium. See Balance; Posture, postural equilibrium in Postural tone, 886 Posture, 883–906 control of, nervous system in, 900–901 attentional ability and demands in, 905 brain stem and cerebellum integration of sensory signals in, 900–902 cerebral cortex centers in, 905 emotional state in, 905 spinal cord circuits in antigravity support, but not balance in, 900–901 spinocerebellum and basal ganglia in adaptation of posture in, 902, 903f, 904f highlights, 906 integration of sensory information in, 894–898, 899f ambiguous information from single sensory modality in, 897, 898f internal models for balance in, 898, 899f somatosensory signals in automatic postural response timing and direction in, 894–895, 895f specific sensory modalities on balance and orientation according to task in, 899f, 900, 901f vestibular information for balance on unstable surfaces and in head movements in, 895–897, 896f visual inputs in for advanced knowledge of destabilizing situations, 897 for orienting to environment, 896f, 897 during locomotion, 802–804, 803f postural equilibrium in, control of center of mass in, 886–888 anticipatory postural adjustments in, for changes in voluntary movements, 892–894, 892f, 893f automatic postural responses in adaptation to changes in requirements for support by, 888–889, 891f somatosensory signals in timing and direction of, 894–895, 895f spinal cord circuits in, 900–901 to unexpected disturbances, 886–888, 887f–889f center of pressure in, 884, 885b, 885f definitions and fundamentals of, 884

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1627

postural orientation in, 884

in anticipation of disturbance to

balance, 894–895

on center of mass location, 884 integration of sensory information in, 894–898, 899f vs. postural equilibrium, 884 for sensation interpretation, 894 for task execution, 892 synergistic activation of muscles in, 890b, 890f Potassium channels. See K + channels Potentiation, 351, 352f–353f. See also Long-term potentiation (LTP) Potter, David, 243 PPN (pedunculopontine nucleus), 800, 802f, 808–809 P/Q-type Ca 2+ channel, 329, 331t, 332 Prader-Willi syndrome, 1533–1534, 1533f Pre-Bötzinger complex, 995, 995f Precedence effect, 694 Precentral gyrus, 16, 17f Precession, 112 Prediction-error signal, 1068 Predictive control mechanisms, 723–724, 724f Predictive relationships, 1308 Preferred movement direction, 845 Prefrontal cortex category-specific representations in, 573, 574f in encoding of episodic memory, 1297, 1299f in extinction learning, 1518 medial in autonomic function, 1025, 1026f in fear response, 1060, 1061f in mentalizing, 1527, 1528 neurons of, in decision-making, 1401, 1403–1404 in schizophrenia, 1494, 1495f, 1496f, 1499 in short-term memory, 1292, 1293f ventromedial, in emotional processing, 1058–1059, 1058b in working memory, 1292, 1293f Preganglionic neurons functions of, 1016, 1016f locations of, 1016, 1017f, 1018f P-regions, ion channels with, 178, 179f Premotor cortex (PM) anatomy of, 819, 820f lesions of, voluntary behavior impairment in, 829b medial, contextual control of voluntary actions in, 829–831, 830f voluntary movement control in, 710, 828–829 application of rules governing behavior for, 832f, 833, 835, 836f areas active when motor actions of others are observed, 837–840, 839f aspects shared with parietal cortex, 840, 840f contextual control of voluntary actions for, 829–831, 830f Index


perceptual decisions that guide motor

actions for, 835–836, 838f

planning motor actions of hand for,

835, 837f planning sensory-guided hand movement for, 831–833, 832f–834f Premotor neurons, 1426 Preoptic hypothalamus (POA), 1013. See also Hypothalamus control of sexual behavior, aggression, and parental behavior in, 1039–1041, 1040f, 1272 olfactory activation in, 1280f, 1281 Preplate, 1135, 1137f–1138f Preprocessing, of fMRI data, 115–116 Pre-prodynorphin, 369f Presenilin-1, 1568, 1572, 1573f Presenilin-2, 1572, 1573f Pressure, slowly adapting fibers for, 444, 446. See also Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers; Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers Pressure-gated channel, physical models of, 172, 173f Presupplementary motor area, 819, 820f Presynaptic active zone, hair cell, 620–621, 621f Presynaptic facilitation, 353, 354f Presynaptic inhibition action potential in, 353, 354f modulation by, 777, 777f Presynaptic neurons. See Neuron(s), presynaptic Presynaptic terminals, 57f, 58 in neuromuscular junction, 256f, 258 neurotransmitters at, 248–249, 248f in transmitter release, 324–325, 325f, 332–333 axo-axonic synapse and, 351, 352–353, 354f calculating probability of, 335b–336b depolarization and, 324–327, 325f quantal transmission in, 335–337, 335b–336b voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels in, 233 Prevertebral ganglia, 1017–1018, 1017f, 1018f Primary active transport, 195–198, 197f Primary afferent fibers, 409 Primary generalized seizures. See Seizure(s), generalized onset Primary motor cortex coordination with other motor system components, 89, 91f, 710 corticospinal tract transmission to, 89, 90f, 819–821, 822f functional anatomy of, 84f, 819, 820f hand representation in, in stringed instrument players, 1335f, 1336 lesions in, motor execution impairments and, 844b

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Primary motor cortex (Cont.):

motor execution in, 841–856

activity as reflection of higher-order

features of movement, 851–852 activity as reflection of spatial and temporal features of motor output, 844–851 neuron activity correlation with changes in muscle forces, 845, 846f neuron activity correlation with level and direction of isometric force, 846–847, 847f neuron activity correlation with patterns of muscle activity, 849, 849f neuron and muscles tune to direction of reaching, 848–849, 848f population codes and vectors for measurement of, 849–851, 850f adaptability of, 852, 854–856, 854f, 856f corticomotoneuronal cells for, 841, 843f, 844 motor periphery map for, 841, 842f sensory feedback transmission to, 852, 853f visual information from, in locomotion, 804–806, 805f. See also Locomotion Primary muscle diseases. See Myopathies (primary muscle diseases) Primary somatic sensory cortex, 88, 89f. See also Somatosensory cortex/system Primary visual cortex. See Visual cortex Priming memory, in amnesia, 1294, 1296f in synaptic vesicles, 341, 343f visual, for words, 1303, 1303f Prince, David, 1456 Principal sensory trigeminal nucleus, 989f, 990 Prions, 1328 Probabilistic classification task, 121–122 Probe trial test, of memory, 1352f–1353f, 1354f Procedural memory, 1482. See also Memory, implicit Prodynorphin, 490t Proenkephalin (PENK), 369f, 490t Progenitor cells, neural, proliferation of, 1131, 1132f Progesterone, 1262, 1264, 1264f Progesterone receptor, 1264, 1266f Programmed cell death. See Apoptosis Progressive bulbar palsy, 1428 Progressive spinal muscular atrophy, 1428, 1429f Progressive supranuclear palsy, 141b Projection interneurons, 61, 64, 64f Prokaryote, 53 Prolactin release-inhibiting hormone (PIH), 1029t Promoters, 29, 30f Proneural region, 1132 Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1628

in energy balance regulation,

1036f–1037f, 1037–1038

as opioid peptide, 490t

precursor of, 369f variation in peptides produced by, 370 Proprioception, 408 mechanoreceptors for, 415t, 416f, 421–422, 422f muscle spindle as receptor for, 421–422, 422f oculomotor, 586–587, 587f, 588f reflexes in, 779 SA2 fibers in, 446 sensations for, loss of, 1428 in sensorimotor control, 733b, 733f in timing and amplitude of stepping, 795, 798f Propriospinal neurons, 778, 778f Prosodic cues, 1376 Prosody, right and left hemispheres in, 1382 Prosomeres, 1115, 1123 Prosopagnosia characteristics of, 1473, 1477–1478 fMRI studies of, 121 inferior temporal cortex damage in, 505, 568 Prostaglandin(s) in fever, 1031 in pain, 478 Prosthetic arms brain-machine interfaces in, 965, 967f, 968f concept of, 954–955, 955f Protanomaly, 539 Protanopia, 539 Proteasomes, 135 Protein. See also specific proteins abnormal accumulation of, in neurological disorders, 141b, 142f axon transport of, 142, 144f in dendritic spines, 146, 1466f synthesis of. See Protein synthesis Protein kinase cAMP-dependent. See Protein kinase A (PKA) GMP-dependent, 312 variation in, on fly and honeybee activity, 42, 44, 44f Protein kinase A (PKA), 303, 304f, 362b, 1317 in growth cone, 1166f in long-term potentiation, 1348 in long-term sensitization, 1319, 1321f, 1323 in sensitization, 1317, 1318f–1319f structure of, 1323–1324 in synaptic capture, 1327, 1328f in synaptic terminal synthesis, 1329f Protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms, 307f in long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission, 286f–287f in sensitization, 1317, 1318f–1319f Protein kinase M (PKM), 307f Protein misfolding gene expression alterations from,

1555–1556

in Parkinson disease, 1553–1554 Protein phosphatases, in growth cone, 1164 Protein synthesis at axon terminals, CPEB as self-perpetuating switch of, 1327–1328, 1329f local prion-like protein regulator of, in long-term memory, 1327–1328, 1329f in synaptic capture, 1327, 1328f in neurons, 147–150 in endoplasmic reticulum, 147–149, 148f modification in Golgi complex, 149–150 Protein transport, in neuron. See Axonal transport Proteolipid protein (PLP), 156b Proteolipids, 156b Proteome, 53 Proteomics, 134 Protocadherin 14, 611, 612f Protocerebrum, lateral, 693f, 694 Protofilaments, 139, 140f Protomap, cortical, 1123 Provisional affordance, 1413 PRR (parietal reach region), 825, 826f–827f, 832f Pruning, of synaptic connections. See Synaptic pruning Prusiner, Stanley, 1328 Pruszynski, Andrew, 441–442 PSD. See Postsynaptic density (PSD) Pseudo-conditioning. See Sensitization Pseudo-unipolar cells, 409 Pseudo-unipolar neurons, 59, 60f Psychiatric illness. See also specific types brain function in, 7 multigenic traits in, 48 Psychogenic amnesia, 1485 Psychometric function, 388, 388f, 1398 Psychomotor Vigilance Test, 1087, 1091 Psychophysics, 387–388, 388f Psychophysiology, 1046b–1047b Psychostimulants, 1072t, 1074. See also Drug addiction Psychotherapy, for mood and anxiety disorders, 1515, 1518 Psychotic episodes/symptoms in major depressive disorder, 1503 in mania, 1504 in schizophrenia, 1490 Ptácˇ ˇ ek, Louis, 42 PTEN, in axon regeneration, 1247, 1248f Ptf1a, 1145, 1145f Ptosis in myasthenia gravis, 1433, 1433f oculomotor nerve lesion in, 864b PTSD. See Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) PTX3 receptor, in pain, 472 P-type ATPases, 97, 197f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Pulse sequence, in fMRI, 114

Pulvinar, 82f, 83, 503f, 504f–505f, 505

Pump, ion. See Ion pump

Pupil(s), 521, 522f Pupillary light reflexes, 992–993, 993f Pupillary reflexes, visual processing pathways for, 501, 503f Purcell, Edward, 125 Purine(s), 364 Purinergic receptors, 291, 364 Purkinje cells in autism spectrum disorder, 1539 in cerebellum, 105, 918, 919f depression of synaptic input to, 924–925, 924f excitability properties of, 229 excitatory and inhibitory inputs on, 105, 920 in eyeblink conditioning, 108, 109f morphology of, 1160, 1161f in saccadic adaptation, 925, 927f simple and complex spikes from, 108–109, 918, 920f synaptic plasticity in, 108–109, 109f Pursuit smooth. See Smooth-pursuit eye movements vestibular responses to, 642 Pushing vector, of neuron, 962, 962f–963f Putnam, Tracey, 1448 Pyramidal decussation, 89 Pyramidal neurons cortical. See Cortical neurons excitability properties of, 229, 230f excitatory postsynaptic potential and, 1452b, 1452f morphology of, 1160, 1161f in schizophrenia, 1494, 1496f Pyramidal tracts, 821 Pyridostigmine, for myasthenia gravis, 1435 PYY (peptide Y), 1034, 1036f–1037f Q 15q11-13 deletion, 1533–1534, 1533f

22q11 deletion, 48, 50, 1492

Q-SNAREs, 344f, 345

Quadriceps muscle stretch reflex, 274, 275f Quadrupedal locomotion, 788–789, 793, 794f–795f. See also Locomotion Quanta, 332 Quantal content, 335b–336b Quantal output, 335b–336b Quantal synaptic potential, 332 Quantal units, of transmitter release, 332–333, 334f Quick phase, 640 Quinine, tinnitus from, 624 R Rab3, 344f, 349

Rab27, 344f, 349

Rabi, Isidor, 125

Radial glial cells

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1629

astrocytes from, 1131

delta-notch signaling and basic helix-

loop-helix in generation of,

1131–1135, 1134f, 1135f as neural progenitors and structural scaffolds, 1131, 1133f neuronal migration along, 1137–1138, 1138f, 1139f Radial migration, glial cells as scaffold for, 1137, 1138f, 1139f Raichle, Marcus, 399 RA-LTMRs (rapidly adapting lowthreshold mechanoreceptors), 419, 420f–421f Ramirez, Naja Ferjan, 1378 Ramirez-Esparza, Nairan, 1378 Ramón y Cajal, Santiago on axon vs. dendrite differentiation, 1156–1157 on axonal chemotactic factors, 8 cellular brain studies of, 10, 1103 on central nerve pathway axon regeneration, 1243 on chemotactic factors, 1176 on glial function, 151, 151f Golgi's staining method use by, 58–59 on growth cone, 8, 1162, 1163f on neuron death and regeneration, 1237 on neuron migration, 1137 plasticity hypothesis, 71 Random mutagenesis, 35b Random-dot motion discrimination task, 1396–1397, 1397f Random-dot stereograms, 552 Range of motion, muscle torque in, 754, 754f Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. See REM sleep Rapidly adapting low-threshold mechanoreceptors (RA-LTMRs), 419, 420f–421f Rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fibers in grip control, 446–450, 449f in motion detection, 445f, 446 receptive fields of, 438–439, 442f in touch receptors, 437–438, 437f, 438t in vibration detection, 446, 448f Rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fibers in grip control, 446–450, 449f receptive fields of, 438–439, 442f in touch receptors, 437–438, 437f, 438t in vibration detection, 439, 446, 447f, 448f Rapsyn, 1195f, 1196, 1198 Ras protein, 308–309 Rate coding in sensory neurons, 395 of time-varying sounds, 672–673, 672f Rauschecker, Josef, 1379 Reaching. See Grasping and reaching Reaction-time tasks, 821, 823f Reactive astrocytosis, 159 Readiness potential, 830–831 Rebound sleep, 1086

Index

Recall of memory

conscious, 1482–1483, 1482f

in conscious mental process disorders,

1482–1483, 1482f visual, associative, 578–579, 579f Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses, 390b, 390f Receptive aphasia, 17 Receptive fields, 531 center-surround, 531, 532f of cortical neurons, 457–459, 458f, 459f definition of, 558 end-inhibited, 549, 550f origin of, 506 of parietal neurons, 825–827, 826f–827f, 828f of relay neurons, 399–400 of sensory neurons, 397–398, 398f, 399f in visual processing eccentricity in, 506–507, 509f on-center, off-surround in, 506, 508f on-center and off-center in, 506, 508f remapping of, with saccadic eye movements, 583–584, 585f at successive relays, 506–508, 507f–509f in zone of tactile sensitivity, 438–439, 442f Receptor(s). See also specific types at central synapses, 1198–1199, 1201f concentration of, at nerve terminals, 1198–1199 ion channel gating by, 250–251, 251f postsynaptic, neurotransmitter binding to, 249–250 sensory. See Sensory receptors somatosensory system. See Somatosensory cortex/system, receptors surface, in ectodermal cell differentiation, 1108 transmembrane, genes encoding, 33 Receptor potential, 65, 66f, 67t, 391, 410 Receptor tyrosine kinases, 302, 302f functions of, 308 ligands for, 308 metabotropic receptor effects of, 308–309, 309f Receptor-channels acetylcholine. See Acetylcholine (ACh) receptors (receptor-channels) GABA A . See GABA A receptors (receptor-channels) glutamate. See Glutamate receptors (receptor-channels) glycine. See Glycine receptors (receptor-channels) G-protein coupled. See G proteincoupled receptors ionotropic vs. metabotropic, 251, 312–313, 312t, 313f, 314f Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 151 Recessive mutations, 32

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Index

Rechtschaffen, Allan, 1096

Reciprocal inhibition, 63f, 64

Reciprocal inhibitory synapse, 537

Reciprocal innervation, 762, 766, 775 Recognition molecules, in selective synapse formation, 1182–1184, 1183f–1186f Recombination, 53 Reconsolidation, of memory, 1330 Rectifier channel, 171, 171f Rectifying synapses, 244 Recurrent loops, in cerebellum, 912, 913f Recurrent networks, 399 Recurrent neural circuits, 102f, 103, 105–107, 106f Red cones, 393, 394f Red-green defect, 539, 539f 5-α-Reductase II deficiency, 1253, 1265t, 1279–1280 reeler mutant, 1136f–1137f Reelin signaling pathway mutations, 1136f, 1138 Reese, Thomas, 337–338, 339f Referred pain, 474, 476f Reflectance, 540 Reflexes axon, 479 baroceptor, 994, 1023, 1027f vs. complex mental function, 70 corneal, 993 cranial nerve, 992–994 crossed-extension, 771 cutaneous, 763f, 770–772 flexion, 763f, 771–772 flexion-withdrawal, 763f, 770–772 gag, 993–994 gastrointestinal, 993 gill-withdrawal, in Aplysia. See Aplysia Hering-Breuer, 779 hierarchy of, 716 Hoffmann. See Hoffmann reflex knee-jerk, 62, 62f, 66, 66f neural architecture for, 70 phase-dependent reversal of, 799 proprioceptive, 779 pupillary light, 992–993, 993f sensory, motor, and muscle signals in, 68, 69f, 716 spinal pathways for, 779 stapedial, 993 state-dependent reversal of, 776 strength of, alterations in, 780 stretch. See Stretch reflex tendon, 780 vestibulo-ocular. See Vestibulo-ocular reflexes Refractory period absolute, 220 after action potential, 212, 219f after recovery of Na + channel from inactivation, 220, 221f relative, 220 Refractory state, of ion channels, 173, 174f Regeneration

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1630

axon. See Axon regeneration

in hematopoietic system, 1249

Regulated secretion, 150

Regulatory needs, motivational states for, 1066 Reinforcement, 1306 Reinforcement learning in basal ganglia, 944–946, 945f vs. error-based learning, 734 types of, 734 Reinforcing stimulus, 1306 Reissner's membrane, 600, 600f, 605f Relapse, in drug addiction, 1073. See also Drug addiction Relational associations, hippocampus in, 1300–1302, 1302f Relative refractory period, 220 Relay interneurons, 61 Relay neurons, in sensory systems, 399–400, 401f Relay nuclei, of thalamus, 83 Reliability, synaptic, 337 REM sleep ascending arousal system pathways in, 1085–1086, 1087f, 1088f dreams in, 1082, 1086, 1088f EEG of, 76, 1081f physiologic changes in, 1081, 1081f, 1082 rebound, 1086 switch, 1088f REM sleep behavior disorder, 1095 Remodeling, thalamic input to visual circuit for, 1221–1223, 1223f REM-OFF neurons, 1088f REM-ON neurons, 1088f Renin, 1033 Renshaw cells, 775–776, 776f Rensink, Ron, 1476 Repair, of damaged brain. See Brain, damage to/lesions of Repetition, in learning, 1304 Repetition suppression, in fMRI studies, 118 Repetitive behaviors, in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f, 1530 Replay, in place cells, 101f, 102, 1366 Representational model, 817 Representational similarity analysis, in fMRI, 119 Reproductive behavior, hypothalamus on, 1013t RER (rough endoplasmic reticulum), 135–137, 136f Reserpine, 1516f–1517f Residual Ca 2+ , 351 Resistance axial, 205 axonal, 204f of currents through single ion channel, 171 cytoplasmic, 204–205, 204f intracellular axial, 202–203 membrane, 204–205, 204f Resonance, 1167

Resonant frequency, 112

Restiform body, 912

Resting ion channel, 132, 166, 190 Resting membrane potential (Vr r ) action potential on ion flux balance in, 198–199 charge separation across membrane and, 191, 191f definition of, 64, 191 equivalent circuit model for calculation of, 202b–203b, 202f, 203f Goldman equation on ion contribution to, 199 nongated and gated ion channels in, 191–198 active transport in electrochemical gradients of Na + , K + , and Ca 2+ in, 195–198, 196f, 197f Cl -active transport in, 198 ion concentration gradients in, 193 ion conductance in open channels in resting nerve cells in, 194–195, 196f ion distribution across membrane in, 193, 193t K + permeability of glial cell open channels in, 191f, 193–194, 194f recording of, 192b, 192f Restless leg syndrome, 1095 REST/NRSF, 1135 Restriction endonuclease, 53 Resveratrol, 1566 Reticular formation, 992–998 mono- and polysynaptic brain stem relays of, in cranial nerve reflexes, 992–994, 993f pattern generators of in breathing, 994–998, 995f–997f in stereotypic and autonomic behaviors, 992, 994 Reticular nucleus, of thalamus, 82, 82f Retina, 521–544 bipolar cells in, 536, 537f circuitry of, 522, 524f disease from phototransduction defects in, 530 functional anatomy of, 521–522, 522f–524f ganglion cells in. See Retinal ganglion cells highlights, 543 interneuron network in output of, 536–540 color blindness and, 538–539, 538f, 539f color vision in cone-selective circuits in, 538 parallel pathway origin in bipolar cells in, 524f, 531, 536, 537f rod and cone circuit merging in inner retina in, 524f, 540 spatial filtering via lateral inhibition in, 524f, 536–537

19/01/21 9:18 AM
Index

Rechtschaffen, Allan, 1096

Reciprocal inhibition, 63f, 64

Reciprocal inhibitory synapse, 537

Reciprocal innervation, 762, 766, 775 Recognition molecules, in selective synapse formation, 1182–1184, 1183f–1186f Recombination, 53 Reconsolidation, of memory, 1330 Rectifier channel, 171, 171f Rectifying synapses, 244 Recurrent loops, in cerebellum, 912, 913f Recurrent networks, 399 Recurrent neural circuits, 102f, 103, 105–107, 106f Red cones, 393, 394f Red-green defect, 539, 539f 5-α-Reductase II deficiency, 1253, 1265t, 1279–1280 reeler mutant, 1136f–1137f Reelin signaling pathway mutations, 1136f, 1138 Reese, Thomas, 337–338, 339f Referred pain, 474, 476f Reflectance, 540 Reflexes axon, 479 baroceptor, 994, 1023, 1027f vs. complex mental function, 70 corneal, 993 cranial nerve, 992–994 crossed-extension, 771 cutaneous, 763f, 770–772 flexion, 763f, 771–772 flexion-withdrawal, 763f, 770–772 gag, 993–994 gastrointestinal, 993 gill-withdrawal, in Aplysia. See Aplysia Hering-Breuer, 779 hierarchy of, 716 Hoffmann. See Hoffmann reflex knee-jerk, 62, 62f, 66, 66f neural architecture for, 70 phase-dependent reversal of, 799 proprioceptive, 779 pupillary light, 992–993, 993f sensory, motor, and muscle signals in, 68, 69f, 716 spinal pathways for, 779 stapedial, 993 state-dependent reversal of, 776 strength of, alterations in, 780 stretch. See Stretch reflex tendon, 780 vestibulo-ocular. See Vestibulo-ocular reflexes Refractory period absolute, 220 after action potential, 212, 219f after recovery of Na + channel from inactivation, 220, 221f relative, 220 Refractory state, of ion channels, 173, 174f Regeneration

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1630

axon. See Axon regeneration

in hematopoietic system, 1249

Regulated secretion, 150

Regulatory needs, motivational states for, 1066 Reinforcement, 1306 Reinforcement learning in basal ganglia, 944–946, 945f vs. error-based learning, 734 types of, 734 Reinforcing stimulus, 1306 Reissner's membrane, 600, 600f, 605f Relapse, in drug addiction, 1073. See also Drug addiction Relational associations, hippocampus in, 1300–1302, 1302f Relative refractory period, 220 Relay interneurons, 61 Relay neurons, in sensory systems, 399–400, 401f Relay nuclei, of thalamus, 83 Reliability, synaptic, 337 REM sleep ascending arousal system pathways in, 1085–1086, 1087f, 1088f dreams in, 1082, 1086, 1088f EEG of, 76, 1081f physiologic changes in, 1081, 1081f, 1082 rebound, 1086 switch, 1088f REM sleep behavior disorder, 1095 Remodeling, thalamic input to visual circuit for, 1221–1223, 1223f REM-OFF neurons, 1088f REM-ON neurons, 1088f Renin, 1033 Renshaw cells, 775–776, 776f Rensink, Ron, 1476 Repair, of damaged brain. See Brain, damage to/lesions of Repetition, in learning, 1304 Repetition suppression, in fMRI studies, 118 Repetitive behaviors, in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f, 1530 Replay, in place cells, 101f, 102, 1366 Representational model, 817 Representational similarity analysis, in fMRI, 119 Reproductive behavior, hypothalamus on, 1013t RER (rough endoplasmic reticulum), 135–137, 136f Reserpine, 1516f–1517f Residual Ca 2+ , 351 Resistance axial, 205 axonal, 204f of currents through single ion channel, 171 cytoplasmic, 204–205, 204f intracellular axial, 202–203 membrane, 204–205, 204f Resonance, 1167

Resonant frequency, 112

Restiform body, 912

Resting ion channel, 132, 166, 190 Resting membrane potential (Vr r ) action potential on ion flux balance in, 198–199 charge separation across membrane and, 191, 191f definition of, 64, 191 equivalent circuit model for calculation of, 202b–203b, 202f, 203f Goldman equation on ion contribution to, 199 nongated and gated ion channels in, 191–198 active transport in electrochemical gradients of Na + , K + , and Ca 2+ in, 195–198, 196f, 197f Cl -active transport in, 198 ion concentration gradients in, 193 ion conductance in open channels in resting nerve cells in, 194–195, 196f ion distribution across membrane in, 193, 193t K + permeability of glial cell open channels in, 191f, 193–194, 194f recording of, 192b, 192f Restless leg syndrome, 1095 REST/NRSF, 1135 Restriction endonuclease, 53 Resveratrol, 1566 Reticular formation, 992–998 mono- and polysynaptic brain stem relays of, in cranial nerve reflexes, 992–994, 993f pattern generators of in breathing, 994–998, 995f–997f in stereotypic and autonomic behaviors, 992, 994 Reticular nucleus, of thalamus, 82, 82f Retina, 521–544 bipolar cells in, 536, 537f circuitry of, 522, 524f disease from phototransduction defects in, 530 functional anatomy of, 521–522, 522f–524f ganglion cells in. See Retinal ganglion cells highlights, 543 interneuron network in output of, 536–540 color blindness and, 538–539, 538f, 539f color vision in cone-selective circuits in, 538 parallel pathway origin in bipolar cells in, 524f, 531, 536, 537f rod and cone circuit merging in inner retina in, 524f, 540 spatial filtering via lateral inhibition in, 524f, 536–537

19/01/21 9:18 AM

temporal filtering in synapses

and feedback circuits in, 524f,

526f–527f, 532f, 535f, 537

layers and synapses of, 522–524, 523f light adaptation in, 540–543 gain controls in, 526f–527f, 535f, 541, 541f, 542f reflectance in, 540, 541f in retinal processing and visual perception, 540–541, 542f on spatial processing, 524f, 532f, 534b–535b, 535f, 543 photoreceptor layers in, 391f, 522–526 ocular optics on retinal image quality in, 522–524, 522f, 525f rods and cones in, 524–526, 525f, 526f phototransduction in, 521–522, 522f, 526–530 excited rhodopsin on phosphodiesterase via G protein transducin in, 526f–527f, 529–530 general mechanism of, 526, 526f–527f light activation of pigment molecules in, 526f, 528–529, 528f, 529f mechanisms to shut off cascade in, 526f–527f, 530 transmission of neural images in. See Retinal ganglion cells Retinal, 528, 528f Retinal center of gaze, 522f, 526 Retinal disparity, 880 Retinal ganglion cells, 522, 523f axons of, 1101f–1102f, 1182, 1183f growth and guidance of, 1168–1176, 1170f–1171f, 1172f ephrin gradients of inhibitory brain signals in, 1172–1176, 1174f, 1175f growth cone divergence at optic chiasm in, 1171–1172, 1172f, 1173f regeneration of, 1256, 1256f in circadian rhythm, 1090 electrical activity and synaptic connection specificity in, 1187, 1188f M-cells, 523f, 531 P-cells, 523f, 531 in pupillary light reflex, 992, 993f segregation in lateral geniculate nucleus, 1224–1225, 1225f, 1226f synapses of, layer-specific, 1182–1184, 1184f temporal changes in stimuli on output of, 531, 532f transgenic labeling of, 1101f–1102f transmission of neural images to brain in, 530–536 ganglion cell parallel pathways to brain in, 531, 536 image edge response in, 531, 532f ON and OFF cells in, 530–531, 536 parallel pathways to brain in, 523f retinal output and moving objects in, 531, 533f, 534b–535b temporal changes in stimuli on output in, 531, 532f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1631

Retinal prosthesis, 954

Retinitis pigmentosa, 530

Retinoic acid, in neural patterning,

1114, 1116f Retinotectal map, 1226–1227 Retinotopic areas, 504f–505f Retinotopic organization, 501, 509f Retinotopy, 501 Retraction bulbs, 1242 Retrieval bulk, 343, 343f in episodic memory processing, 1294b, 1297–1298 Retrograde axonal transport, 144, 144f Rett syndrome genetics of, 47–48, 1467, 1532 seizures in, 1467 symptoms of, 1531–1532 Reuptake, of transmitters from synaptic cleft, 375 Reverse genetics, 34 Reverse inference, in fMRI studies, 123 Reverse (reversal) potentials, 218b, 261, 262b Reverse transcriptase, 52 Reward amygdala in processing of, 1055 definition of, 1066 neural circuitry for, 1066–1068, 1067f pathological. See Drug addiction short and long timescales for, 1066 Reward prediction error, 122 Rho kinase (ROCK), 1245, 1245f Rhodopsin, 528, 528f excited, on phosphodiesterase via G protein transducin, 526f–527f, 529–530 phosphorylation of, 526f–527f, 529–530 Rhombomeres formation of, 1115, 1116f Hox gene expression and, 1120, 1121f segmental organization of, 987, 988f Rhythmic movements, 715 Ribbon synapse, 536, 618–621, 621f Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 29, 146, 147f Ribosomes, 135, 136f, 146, 147f Ribs, of synaptic vesicles, 349, 350f Richter, Joel, 1327 rig-1 protein, in axon growth and guidance, 1178–1179, 1178f Right hemisphere, in prosody, 1382, 1383f Right-beating nystagmus, 640 RIM, 349, 351 RIM-binding proteins, 349 Rinne test, 601 RNA, 27. See also specific types RNA interference (RNAi) definition of, 53 on gene function, 36b mechanism in, 149 RNAscope, 372f, 373b RNS System, for seizure detection and prevention, 1459b, 1459f Index Robo, in axon growth and guidance,

1178–1179, 1178f

Robust nucleus of the archistriatum (RA),

1267, 1271f ROC (receiver operating characteristic) analyses, 390b, 390f Rod(s) functions of, 525–526 graded sensitivity of, 393, 394f, 526f response to light, 391f, 393 structure of, 524, 525f visual pigments in, 528f Rod circuit, in inner retina, 524f, 540 Romo, Ranulfo, 461, 1403 Rosenthal, David, 1490–1491 Rostral, 11b, 11f Rostral spinal cord, 78f Rostral superior colliculus, in visual fixation, 873 Rostral-caudal axis, of central nervous system, 11b, 11f, 14f Rostrocaudal patterning, of neural tube. See Neural tube development, rostrocaudal patterning in Rotating visual field, orienting to, 895–896, 896f Rotational vestibulo-ocular reflex. See Vestibulo-ocular reflexes Rothman, James, 345 Rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), 135–137, 136f Round window, 599f, 600, 600f rRNA (ribosomal RNA), 29, 146, 147f R-SNAREs, 345 R-type Ca 2+ channel, 329, 331t, 332 Rubin figure, 1476, 1476f Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, 1323 Rubor, 479 Rudin, Donald, 162b Ruffini endings fiber group, name, and modality for, 415t in human hand, 437f, 438–439, 438t, 442f innervation and action of, 421 SA2 fibers in. See Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers Rule cue, 835 Runx1, 1143f Runx3, 1143f rutabaga gene, 1330 Ryanodine receptors, 1441 S S cones, 525–526, 526f, 538 S opsin, 528f S 0 (sensory threshold), 387–388, 1401, 1402f SA1 fibers. See Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers SA2 fibers. See Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Saccades

brain stabilization of images during

challenges of, 582, 583f, 584f

corollary discharge in, 583–587, 586f double-step task in, 584, 584f motor commands copied to visual system in, 582–583, 585f receptive field remapping in, 583, 585f brain stem motor circuits for, 868–870 brain stem lesions on, 870 mesencephalic reticular formation in vertical saccades in, 863f, 870 pontine reticular formation in horizontal saccades in, 868–870, 869f cerebellar learning on, 925, 927f control of, 105–106, 106f, 877 cortical pathways for, 871, 871f in fish, 247–248 function of, 531 in pointing fovea to objects of interest, 866–867, 867f, 879f proprioceptive eye measurement in, 587–588, 587f, 589f in reading, 866 superior colliculus control of, 871–875 basal ganglia inhibition in, 873–874, 873f cerebral cortex in, 871f, 873–877, 874f, 876f, 879f cortical pathways in, 871, 871f experience in, 877 frontal eye field in, 875 movement-related neurons in, 875, 876f rostral superior colliculus in visual fixation in, 873 supplementary eye field in, 875 visual neurons in, 875, 876f visuomotor integration into oculomotor signals to brain stem in, 871–873, 872f, 873f visuomovement neurons in, 875 Saccadic eye movements. See Saccades Saccadic pulse, 867, 868f Saccadic step, 867, 868f, 870 Saccadic system, 866–867, 867f, 879f Saccule, 600f, 630, 630f Sacktor, Todd, 1348 Sacral spinal cord, 13f, 78–79, 78f SAD kinases, in hippocampal neuronal polarity, 1158f Sadness cortical regions in, 1058, 1060 vs. major depressive disorder, 1502. See also Major depressive disorder Saffran, Jenny, 1376 Sagittal plane, of central nervous system, 11b Sakmann, Bert, 162b, 171, 260, 329 Salivary glands, 1021 Salivary neurons, 993

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1632

Index Sally-Anne test, 1526, 1526f Saltatory conduction, 152, 153f, 208

Saltatory movement, axonal, 143

Salty taste receptor, 698f, 701 Sarcomere anatomy of, 745, 748f–749f contractile proteins in, 745–747, 748f–749f length and velocity of, on contractile force, 749, 751f on muscle function, 752 SARM1, 1238, 1239f SAT (system A transporter), 366f Saturation effect, 171 Savant syndrome, in autism spectrum disorder, 1528–1529, 1530f SBMA. See Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease) Scaffold active zone protein, fusion machinery in, 344f, 349, 350f radial glial cells as, 1131, 1133f for radial migration, glial cells as, 1137, 1138f, 1139f Scala media, 600, 600f, 602f–603f Scala tympani, 599, 600f, 602f–603f Scala vestibuli, 599, 600f, 602f–603f Scarring, on axonal regeneration, 1245f, 1246 SCAs. See Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), hereditary Scene segmentation, 555, 560 Schäffer, Edward Albert, 358, 566 Schaffer collateral pathway long-term potentiation in induction of, 1344f–1345f neural mechanisms of, 1342, 1343f NMDA receptor-dependent, 284, 286f–287f postsynaptic contribution to, 1345, 1346f overview of, 1340, 1341f in spatial memory, 1351 tetanic stimulation of, 1342, 1343f Schally, Andrew, 1028 Schenck, C.H., 1095 Schizophrenia, 1488–1499 brain structure and function abnormalities in, 1492–1497 basal ganglia dysfunction, 947f, 949 brain development abnormalities in adolescence, 1494, 1497, 1497f connectivity disruptions, 1494, 1496f gray matter loss, 1492, 1493f, 1494 lateral ventricle enlargement, 1492, 1493f prefrontal cortex deficits, 1494, 1495f synapse elimination, 1497, 1497f cognitive deficits in, 1567 course of illness, 1490 diagnosis of, 1489–1490 dopamine in, 1498 environmental risk factors, 49, 1490 epidemiology of, 1488, 1490

episodic nature of, 1490

fMRI in, 1494, 1495f

genetics in

heritability and, 28f, 49 as risk factor, 1490–1492, 1491f studies of, 50–51 hallucinations in, 1476–1477 highlights, 1499 hippocampal function alterations in, 1367 NMDA receptor malfunction in, 286–287 speech in, 1489b symptoms of, 948, 1489–1490 treatment of, 1497–1499, 1498f Schizotypal disorder, 1491 Schleiden, Jacob, 58 Schultz, Wolfram, 1068 Schwann, Theodor, 58 Schwann cells functions of, 134, 151 gap-junction channels in, 248 genetic abnormalities of, 1431f on myelin, after axotomy, 1240 structure of, 134, 134f Schwannoma, vestibular, 986 SCN9A, in pain, 472 Scoville, William, 1293 Sculpting role, of inhibition, 290, 290f SDN-POA (sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area), 1272 Second messengers, 303–322. See also specific types Ca 2+ as, 327, 327f cytosolic proteins in, 135 G protein-coupled receptor-initiated in cAMP pathway, 303–305 molecular logic of, 305–308 G proteins activating pathways of, 304f, 305 IP3 and diacylglycerol from phospholipase C hydrolysis of phospholipids in, 305–308, 307f membrane-spanning domains in, 305, 306f phospholipid hydrolysis by phospholipase A2 on arachidonic acid in, 310, 311f protein kinase C isoforms in, 307f in growth cone, 1164 highlights, 321–322 ionotropic vs. metabotropic receptor actions in, 312–315 cAMP-dependent protein phosphorylation closing of K + channels in, 317, 318f functional effects in, 312, 312t G protein ion channel modulation in, direct, 315, 316f ion channel opening in, increase or decrease of, 312t, 313–315, 313f, 314f presynaptic and postsynaptic modulation, 312–313, 313f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

long-lasting consequences of synaptic

transmission with, 317, 319f

in postsynaptic ion channels, 251, 251f positive signs of, 1448

prolonged, as medical emergency,

1465–1466

Index


Sensitive periods, 1211. See also Critical periods

Sensitization

central, 479, 481, 483f

definition of, 1305, 1316 dishabituation and, 1305–1306, 1316 to drug, 1072 length of, 1316 long-term cAMP signaling in, 1319, 1321f, 1322f, 1323 presynaptic facilitation of synaptic transmission in, 1316–1317, 1318f–1319f, 1324, 1325f modulatory neurons in, 1317, 1318f–1319f nociceptor, by bradykinin and histamine, 478 Sensor calcium, 329 voltage, 173 Sensorimotor control, 713–735. See also Voluntary movement challenges of, 714–715, 714f hierarchy of processes in, 715–716 highlights, 735 monoaminergic pathways in, 1004 of motor learning, 729–734 error-based, adaptation of internal models in, 730–732, 731f, 732f proprioception and tactile sense in, 733b, 733f sensorimotor representations in constraint of, 734 skill learning, multiple processes for, 732–734 motor plans for translation of tasks into purposeful movement in, 725–729 optimal feedback control for error correction, 728–729, 729f optimization of costs with, 726–728, 727f, 728f stereotypical patterns in, 725–726, 726f motor signal control in, 716–725 different sensory processing for action and perception, 724–725, 725f feedback, for movement correction, 717f, 719, 720f feedforward, for rapid movements, 716–717, 717f internal sensorimotor models of, 717, 718b sensorimotor delays in, prediction to compensate for, 723–724, 724f sensory and motor signals for estimation of body's current state in, 719–723 Bayesian inference in, 721, 721b observer model of, 722, 722f theoretical frameworks for, 816–818, 817f types of, 715 unconscious mental processes in, 709–710, 715, 1479–1481, 1480f–1481f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

| receptor tyrosine kinases in metabotropic receptor effects of, 308–309, 309f transcellular, in presynaptic function, 310–312 endocannabinoids, 310, 311f nitric oxide, 310 Second pain, 471f, 472, 490 Secondary active transport, 197f, 198 Second-messenger pathways, in hyperalgesia, 481 Secretins, 368t Secretory proteins modification in Golgi complex, 149–150 synthesis in endoplasmic reticulum, 147–149, 148f Secretory vesicles, 135, 136f Sections, 11b, 11f Sedative-hypnotics, 1072t. See also Drug addiction Segmentation, in visual processing, 497, 498f, 499f Seizure(s), 1447–1472 animal models of, 1454 in autism spectrum disorder, 1539 as brain function disruptions, 1448–1449 classification of, 1448–1449, 1449t definition of, 1447 detection and prevention, 956, 1458b–1459b, 1458f, 1459f EEG in. See Electroencephalogram (EEG) epilepsy development and, 1467. See also Epilepsy, development of focal onset, 1448, 1449 auras in, 1449 early study of, 1448 rapid generalization of, 1460 seizure focus in, 1454–1461 abnormal bursting activity of neurons and, 1454–1455, 1455f definition of, 1449 inhibitory surround breakdown in, 146f, 1456–1457 phases of development of, 1454 spatial and temporal organization of, 1456, 1456f spread from, normal cortical circuitry in, 1460–1461, 1460f synchronization of, 1154f, 1454– 1456, 1454f, 1457f termination of, 1457f, 1460 focus of. See Seizure focus generalized onset, 1449 hemispheric disruption in, 1460, 1460f thalamocortical circuits in propagation of, 1461–1463, 1462f tonic-clonic, 1449 typical absence seizure, 1449, 1461, 1462f highlights, 1470–1471 history of, 1447–1448 negative signs of, 1448  simple partial, 1449 termination of, 1457f, 1460 typical absence, 1449, 1461, 1462f Seizure focus, 1454–1461 definition of, 1449 in focal seizures, 1454–1461 inhibitory surround in, 1456–1457, 1456f localization of, for surgery, 1463–1465 on cure rate, 1464–1465 EEG mapping in, 1463 metabolic mapping in, 1463 MRI in, 1463 PET scans in, 1464–1465 SPECT and ictal SPECT in, 1464 in temporal lobe epilepsy, 1463, 1464b–14532b, 1464f, 1465f paroxysmal depolarizing shift and afterhyperpolarization in, 1455 phases of development of, 1454 spatial and temporal organization of, 146f, 1456–1457, 1456f spread from, normal cortical circuitry in, 1457f, 1460–1461 synchronization of, 1454f, 1456–1457, 1456f, 1457f Selection disorders. See Basal ganglia, dysfunction of Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 1511f, 1515, 1516f–1517f Selectivity in basal ganglia, 940, 940f directional, of movement, 554, 555f of ion channels, 166, 167–168, 168f–169f. See also specific ions and channels orientation, 547–548 Selectivity filter, 167–168, 168f–169f Selegiline, 1516f–1517f Self-renewal, 1131, 1132f Self-sustained firing, 745 Semantic memory, 1296. See also Memory, explicit Semaphorins, 1157, 1159f, 1170f–1171f Semicircular canals bilateral symmetry of, 632, 633f function of, 632–634, 634f head rotation sensing by, 632–634, 633f, 634f structure of, 600f Semi-intact preparations, for locomotion studies, 785b–786b Semon, Richard, 1340 Sensation. See also specific types cutaneous, 1428 pain. See Pain phantom limb, 1481 postural orientation in interpretation of, 894 proprioceptive, 1428 purposes of, 385 Senses. See specific senses and sensations   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1633


Index

Sensorimotor skills, learning of. See Motor

skill learning

Sensorineural hearing loss, 601, 626, 626f

Sensory areas. See specific areas Sensory coding, 385–406 central nervous system circuits in feedback pathways, 403–404, 403f functional specialized cortical areas, 399, 400f parallel pathways in cerebral cortex, 402–403, 403f relay neurons, 400–401, 401f top-down learning mechanisms, 404–405 variability in central neuron response, 400, 402f highlights, 405–406 history of study of, 385 neurons in. See Sensory neurons psychophysics in, 387–388, 388f receptors in. See Sensory receptors Sensory disorders. See specific disorders Sensory homunculus, 84–85, 84f Sensory information cerebral cortex pathways for, 402–403, 403f definition of, 385 neural activity encoding of, 98 types of, 385–386, 386f Sensory inputs. See specific types Sensory neurons. See also specific types definition of, 59 of dorsal root ganglia, 79, 79f, 409–410, 410f firing rates of stimulus intensity and, 395–396, 395f stimulus time course and, 396, 397f functional components of, 64, 64f functional groups of, 61f groups of, 59 interspike intervals of, 396, 397f perceptive field of, 397 receptive field of, 397–398, 398f, 399f in spinal cord, 76, 77f tuning of, 402 variability in response of, 401, 402f Sensory pathways. See also specific types components of, 386–387 synapses in, 399, 401f Sensory physiology, 387 Sensory prediction error, 723 Sensory receptors, 132. See also specific types adaptation of, 396 classification of, 392–393, 392t high-threshold, 396 low-threshold, 396 rapidly adapting, 396, 397f slowly adapting, 396, 396f specialization of, 390–393, 391f subclasses and submodalities of, 393–395, 394f surface of, in early stages of response, 400–402 types of, 386, 386f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1634

Sensory signals/feedback

in reflex action, 68, 69f

transmission to primary motor cortex,

852, 853f transmission to somatosensory cortex, 399–400, 401f, 403–404 Sensory stimulation. See specific types Sensory systems. See also specific types definition of, 399 relay neurons in, 399–400, 401f spatial resolution of, 397–398, 399f types of, 392t Sensory threshold (S 0 ), 387–388, 1401, 1402f Sentences, prosodic cues for, 1376 SER (smooth endoplasmic reticulum), 135, 137, 137f Serial processing, in visual columnar systems, 512 Serine proteases, 368 Serotine reuptake blockers, 1007 Serotonergic neurons/system in ascending arousal system, 1186, 1186f in autonomic regulation and breathing modulation, 996, 1002, 1002f–1003f in brain stem, 363, 1513, 1513f as chemoreceptors, 996, 996f functions of, 363 location and projections of, 999f, 1001 in migraine, 1004 in pain perception, 1004 in sudden infant death syndrome, 1002, 1002f–1003f Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) chemical structure of, 363 histone acetylation regulation by, 1322f, 1323 ionotropic receptors and, 291 K + channel closing by, 317, 318f in long-term facilitation of synaptic transmission, 1325, 1326f in memory consolidation switch, 1323, 1324f on motor neurons, 745, 746f in pain processing, 1004 in sensitization, 1317, 1318f–1319f synthesis of, 363, 1513 Serotonin syndrome, 1004 Serotonin transporter (SERT), 366f Serpentine receptors, 305. See also G protein-coupled receptors Sertraline, 1515, 1516f–1517f Servomechanism, 773 Set point calcium, in growth cone, 1164 in homeostasis, 1012–1013, 1012f Settling point model, in homeostasis, 1012f, 1013f Sex anatomical, 1261 chromosomal, 1261–1262, 1262f definition of, 1261 gonadal, 1261

Sex chromosomes, 1260–1261

Sex determination, 1261, 1262f

Sex hormones, 1260–1261

Sex-linked inheritance, 31 Sex-reversed male, 1261 Sexual behavior, hypothalamus in regulation of, 1013t, 1040–1041, 1040f, 1070 Sexual differentiation, 1260–1272 behavioral differences in, 1260–1261 in fruit fly mating behavior, 1266, 1268b, 1269f genetic origins of, 1260–1261 highlights, 1281–1272 physical differences in, 1261–1264 disorders of steroid hormone biosynthesis affecting, 1262–1263, 1265f–1266f, 1324t embryo gonadal differentiation and, 1261–1262, 1262f gonadal synthesis of hormones promoting, 1262–1263, 1263f–1265f sexually dimorphic behaviors in. See Sexually dimorphic behaviors Sexual orientation, 1261 Sexually dimorphic behaviors, 1261, 1264–1277 core mechanisms in brain and spinal cord underlying, 1275–1277, 1276f, 1277f environmental cues in, 1272–1277 in courtship rituals, 1272 early experience on later maternal behavior in rodents in, 1274–1275, 1274f pheromones on partner choice in mice in, 1272–1274, 1273f genetic factors in, 1264, 1266 in humans, 1277–1281 bed nucleus of stria terminalis size and, 1281, 1281f gender identity and sexual orientation and, 1279–1281 hormonal action or experience and, 1279 hypothalamus and, 1278, 1278f olfactory activation and sexual orientation, 1280f, 1281 sexual differentiation of the nervous system and, 1264–1272 in erectile function, 1266–1267, 1270f hypothalamic neural circuits on sexual, aggressive, and parenting behavior, 1039–1041, 1040f, 1272 song production in birds and, 1267 Shadlen, Michael, 390b Sham rage, 1048, 1050f Shape cortical representation of, in visual search, 559–560, 562f object geometry in analysis of, internal models of, 547–550, 548f–550f visuomotor processing of, 840, 840f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Shellfish poisoning, amnestic, 1466–1467

Shereshevski, 1309

Sherrington, Charles

on brain compensation for eye movement in vision, 587 cellular brain studies of, 10 on habituation, 1314 on integration in nervous system, 67, 761–762 on motor units, 737, 1421 on movement, 709 on proprioceptive signals, 779, 795 on receptive field, 506 sensory studies of, 408 on spinal circuitry, 762 on spinal cord in locomotion, 783 on synapses, 241–242 Shh. See Sonic hedgehog (Shh) shiverer (shi) mutant mice, 155b, 155f Shock, spinal, 780–781 Short arm, chromosome, 53 Short circuit, 201 Short-circuiting (shunting) effect, 290 Shortening contraction, 749, 754, 757f Short-range stiffness, 749 Short-term memory. See Memory, short-term Short-wave ripples, in hippocampus, 101–102, 101f Shprintzen, Robert, 48 Si, Kausik, 1327 SIDS (sudden infant death syndrome), 1002, 1002f–1003f Sign language processing, 19–20, 20f Signal detection theory framework of, 1394, 1394f for quantification of sensory detection and discrimination, 389b–390b, 389f, 390f, 1483 Signal pathways, 58 Signaling, in neurons. See Neuron(s), signaling in Signaling endosomes, 1151 Sigrist, Stephan, 349 Silent interval, epilepsy, 1469 Silent mutation, 33f Silent nociceptors, 472, 474, 475f Silent synapses, 1077, 1345, 1346f Simple cells, in visual cortex, 548, 549f Simple (Mendelian) mutation, 33b Simple partial seizures, 1449. See also Seizure(s), focal onset Simple phobias, 1504, 1506, 1515. See also Anxiety disorders Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), 53 Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), 1464 Sirtuins, 1566 Site-directed mutagenesis, in ion channel structure, 177 Size constancy, in object identification, 571, 572f Size–weight illusion, 724–725, 725f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1635

SK channels, 229

Skelemins, 747, 748f–749f

Skeletal mechanoreceptors, 415t

Skeletal muscle, 1421 ion channel dysfunction in, 1441, 1443f. See also Myopathies (primary muscle diseases) legs, properties of, 752–754, 753t Skeletal muscle cells motor neuron activity on biochemical and functional properties of, 1188, 1189f types of, 1188 Skeletal muscle diseases. See Myopathies Skill learning, 1304 Skin mechanoreceptors in. See Cutaneous mechanoreceptors temperature changes in, thermal receptors for, 422–424, 423f Skinner, B.F., 1306, 1373 Sleep, 1080–1098 age-related changes in, 1092, 1562 ascending arousal system in. See Ascending arousal system circadian rhythms in clock for, in suprachiasmatic nucleus, 1087–1088, 1089f, 1090 hypothalamic relays on, 1090–1091, 1091f disruptions in. See Sleep disorders EEG of, 1081–1082, 1081f, 1083f functions of, 1096–1097 highlights, 1097–1098 homeostatic pressure for, 1086–1087 hypnogram of, 1081f loss, effects of, 1091–1092 in newborns, 1092 polysomnogram of, 1080–1081, 1081f pressure for, 1086–1087 REM and non-REM periods in, 1081–1082, 1081f, 1083f unstable respiratory patterns during, 996, 997f Sleep apnea obstructive, 1092 respiratory motor patterns in, 996, 997f sleep pattern disruption by, 1093, 1093f Sleep disorders, 1092–1096 familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome, 1090 insomnia, 1092–1093 narcolepsy, 1085, 1093–1095, 1094f non–24-hour sleep–wake rhythm disorder, 1090 parasomnias, 1095–1096 periodic limb movement disorder, 1095 REM sleep behavior disorder, 1095 restless leg syndrome, 1095 sleep apnea. See Sleep apnea Sleep drive, 1087–1088, 1089f Sleep paralysis, 1094

Index

Sleep spindles, 1081f, 1082, 1083f, 1461,

1462f

Sleep talking, 1095–1096

Sleepiness, 1091–1092 Sleep-wake cycle ascending arousal system in control of, 1082, 1083–1084, 1084f circadian rhythm and, 1088–1090, 1089f firing patterns of monoaminergic neurons in, 1001, 1001f hypothalamus in regulation of, 1013t, 1091f Sleepwalking, 1095–1096 Slice-time correction, in fMRI, 116 Sliding filament hypothesis, 747 Slits, in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f, 1178–1179, 1178f Slow axonal transport, 143, 146–147 Slow channel syndrome, 1436 Slow wave, EEG, 1081f, 1082, 1083f Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers in grip control, 446–450, 449f in object pressure and form detection, 444 receptive fields of, 438–439, 442f sensory transduction in, 417–419, 418f in touch receptors, 437–438, 437f, 438t, 441f in vibration and detection, 446, 448f Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers in grip control, 446–450, 449f in proprioception, 447 receptive fields of, 438–439, 442f in stereognosis, 442f, 444 in touch receptors, 437–438, 437f, 438t Slow-twitch motor units, 740, 740f Slow-twitch muscle fibers, 1189f Slug, 1141 SM proteins, 344f, 346 Small noncoding RNAs, 29 Small synaptic vesicles, 150, 359 Small-molecule neurotransmitters, 360–370. See also specific neurotransmitters acetylcholine. See Acetylcholine (ACh) active uptake of, into vesicles, 364–367, 366f amino acid transmitters, 364. See also GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid); Glutamate; Glycine ATP and adenosine, 364. See also Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) biogenic amines, 360t, 361–364 catecholamine transmitters, 361–363, 362b histamine. See Histamine serotonin. See Serotonin trace, 363 vs. neuroactive peptides, 370–371 overview of, 360 packaging of, 359 precursors of, 360t Smell. See Olfaction SMN (survival motor neuron), 1428, 1429f SMN genes, 1428, 1429f

19/01/21 9:18 AM



Index

Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER), 135,

137, 137f

Smooth muscle, 1421

smoothened, 1118 Smooth-pursuit eye movements, 866–867 brain stem lesions on, 878–879 cerebellar lesions on, 878–879, 912, 916, 916f cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and pons in, 867f, 878–879, 878f, 916f feedback control in, 719 Smooth-pursuit system, 866–867, 879f SN1/SN2 (system N transporter), 366f Snail protein, 1141 SNAP, 346f, 347 SNAP-25, 344f, 345, 346, 346f SNARE proteins, 150, 345–347, 346f, 348f–349f SNB (spinal nucleus of bulbocavernosus), sexual dimorphism in, 1266–1267, 1270f SNCA mutations, in Parkinson disease, 1548–1549, 1550t SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism), 53 Social anxiety disorder, 1506. See also Anxiety disorders Social behaviors. See also specific types early experience and development of, 1211–1212, 1213f genetic influences on, 46–47 neuropeptide receptors on, 44–45, 45f, 46f Social cognition disorders. See Neurodevelopmental disorders Social memory, 1360 Social phobia, 1505. See also Anxiety disorders SOCS3, on axon growth, 1246, 1248f SOD1 mutations, 1427, 1427t Sodium channels. See Na + channels Sodium symporters (NSS) , 275, 375–376 Sodium-potassium pump. See Na + -K + pump Sokolowski, Marla, 42, 44f Solitary nucleus. See Nucleus of solitary tract (NTS) Soma (cell body), of neuron, 57, 57f Somatic sensory columns, cranial nerve general, 987, 989f, 990 special, 989f, 990 Somatosensory cortex/system barrels, 1125–1126, 1127f in central touch system. See Central touch system, somatosensory cortex in characteristics of, 410, 411f cranial and spinal nerves in, 427, 429–432 dermatomes in, 429, 430f spinal cord dorsal horn, 431–432, 431f spinal cord gray matter, 429–430, 431f definition of, 408 electrical microstimulation of, in brainmachine interfaces, 967–968

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1636

in emotional response, 1058b, 1060

exteroception in, 408–409

in flavor perception, 702

interoception in, 408–409 lesions in, tactile deficits from, 464–466, 465f, 466f mediation of behavior in, 74–82 myotomes in, 429 neural map in experience on, 1335f, 1336 of neural cortical columns, 455, 454f–455f, 456 overall perspective of, 382 pain in, 408 peripheral somatosensory nerve fibers in, 410–414, 412f, 412t, 413f primary, 88, 88f, 819. See also Cerebral cortex, in sensory information processing as primary sensory neurons, 409–410, 410f proprioception in, 408 receptors, 414–426, 415t ambiguous information on posture and body motion from, 897, 898f in automatic postural response timing and direction, 894–895, 895f dorsal root ganglia. See Dorsal root ganglia highlights, 432–433 itch in, 425–426 mechanoreceptors for touch and proprioception, 414–416, 415t, 416f, 417f. See also Mechanoreceptors median nerve, 414 nociceptors for pain, 424–425, 425f proprioceptors for muscle activity and joint position, 421–422, 422f specialized end organs and, 416–421, 418f, 420f–421f thermal receptors for skin temperature changes, 422–424, 423f visceral sensations and internal organ status from, 426 spinal cord-thalamus information flow in, via parallel pathways dorsal column-medial lemniscal system in, 74, 75f, 450f–451f spinothalamic system in, 450f–451f thalamus as link between sensory receptors and cerebral cortex, 82–84, 82f trigeminal, 427, 428f–429f Somatostatin hypothalamus in release of, 1027f, 1028, 1029t as neuroactive peptide, 368t in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475 Somites, 1141, 1142f Sommer, Wilhelm, 1466 Songbirds. See Birds Sonic hedgehog (Shh)

in dopaminergic/serotonergic neuron

position, 1114f, 1119

in thalamic patterning, 1116 in ventral neural tube patterning, 1117–1119, 1118f Sound. See also Auditory processing; Hearing localization of binaural hearing in, 652 dorsal cochlear nucleus in, 656–657, 658f–659f interaural difference in, 652, 653f pathway from inferior colliculus, in gaze control, 669–670 spectral filtering in, 652, 653f ventral cochlear nucleus in, 655–656, 658f–659f mechanical energy in, 599 Sound shadows, 652 Sour taste receptor, 698f, 701–702 SOX9, 1262 Spasticity, 780. See also specific disorders Spatial agnosia, 18 Spatial attention, 560 Spatial buffers, 154 Spatial cognitive maps. See Hippocampus, spatial cognitive maps in Spatial contrast sensitivity, 534b, 535f Spatial filtering, in retina via lateral inhibition, 524f, 536–537 Spatial information in dorsal visual pathway, 505 from sensory neurons, 397–398, 398f Spatial memory. See Memory, spatial Spatial neglect, 1475, 1475f, 1477 Spatial processing, light adaptation on, 524f, 532f, 534b–535b, 535f, 543 Spatial smoothing, in fMRI, 116 Spatial summation, 293, 293f, 774f Spatiotemporal sensitivity, of human perception, 531, 534b–535b Special somatic sensory column, 989f, 990 Special visceral motor column, 989f, 991 SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography), 1464 Spectral filtering, 652, 653f Speech. See also Language learning; Language processing auditory cortex in vocal feedback during, 677, 678f perception of, speech production and, 1373–1374 in schizophrenia, 1489b Speed cells, 1362, 1364f Speed–accuracy trade-off, 727–728, 728f Spemann, Hans, 1108–1110 Spencer, Alden, 1314 Sperry, Roger, 1167, 1168f, 1242 Spike, 1450. See also Action potential Spike train encoding, 395, 395f Spike-timing-dependent plasticity, 1349 Spike-triggered averaging, 765–766 Spiking noise, in neurons, 960, 960f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI), 983f, 985

Spinal cord

anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 76–79, 77f, 78f

cranial nerve nuclei in, 992. See also Cranial nerve nuclei dorsal horn of. See Dorsal horn (spinal cord) early development of, 1116, 1117f gray matter, 428–430 lamina of, 429–430, 431f neurons of, 1116 organization of, vs. brain stem, 992 pain nociceptor inputs to, 474, 475f patterning of. See Patterning, in nervous system sensory-motor integration in, 761–781 CNS damage on, 780–781 spasticity from, 780 spinal shock and hyperreflexia from, 780–781 highlights, 781 history of study of, 761–762 neuronal networks in, 762–773 convergence of sensory inputs on interneurons, 772–773 cutaneous reflexes and complex movements, 770–772 gamma motor neurons in muscle spindles, 764b, 765f, 766–767, 769f, 770f Golgi tendon organs and forcesensitive feedback, 769–770, 771b, 771f, 772f monosynaptic pathway of stretch reflex, 762, 764–766, 768b, 769b polysynaptic pathways, 763f, 767, 769 proprioceptive reflexes for, 779 reflex pathways of muscle contraction for, 762, 763f, 764b–765b, 765f, 802b sensory feedback and descending motor commands for, 773–778 modulation of efficiency of primary sensory fibers, 777–778, 777f modulation of inhibitory interneurons and Renshaw cells, 775–776, 776f in muscle spindle afferent activity, 773–775, 775f in reflex pathway transmission, 776 spinal interneurons for, 778–779 activation of, prior to movement, 779 propriospinal neurons in movement of upper limb, 778–779, 778f somatosensory information circuits in, 76–81 dorsal root ganglia sensory neurons, 79–81, 79f, 80f–81f from trunk and limb, 76–79 Spinal cord disorders and injuries bladder control after, 1023

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1637

epidemiology of, 780

repair of injured neurons in. See Axon

injury (axotomy)

transection, spinal shock and hyperreflexia from, 780–781 walking after, rehabilitative training for, 809, 810b, 810f Spinal muscular atrophy, progressive, 1428, 1429f Spinal nerve roots, 79f Spinal nerves, 79, 427, 429 Spinal neuron(s) axons, midline crossing of, 1176–1179 chemoattractant and chemorepellent factors on, 1176–1179, 1178f netrin direction of commissural axons in, 1176, 1177f, 1178f developmental molecular codes of, 797t Spinal nucleus of bulbocavernosus (SNB), sexual dimorphism in, 1266–1267, 1270f Spinal pattern generators, in locomotion. See Central pattern generators (CPGs) Spinal preparations, for locomotion studies, 785b–786b Spinal reflex pathways, 778–779, 778f Spinal shock, 781 Spinal trigeminal nucleus, 987, 989f, 990 Spines, dendritic. See Dendritic spines Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease), 1546, 1547t, 1551f, 1552 Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), hereditary age of onset of, 1546 clinical features of, 1546, 1547t early-onset, 1550–1551 genetic features of, 1547t, 1555–1548 mouse models of, 1552–1553, 1553f, 1554f neuronal degeneration in, 1550–1552, 1551f treatment of, 1556–1557 Spinocerebellum. See also Cerebellum adaptation of posture in, 902–962, 903f anatomy of, 912f, 916 input and output targets of, 914f, 916 Spinohypothalamic cord to thalamus information transmission, in pain, 484 Spinomesencephalic tract, in pain, 484 Spinoparabrachial tract, in pain, 484, 485f Spinoreticular tract, in pain, 484 Spinothalamic tracts in pain transmission, 484–485, 485f sensory information conveyed by, 450f–451f Spiral ganglion, 621–622, 622f Spitz, René, 1211–1212 Splenium, in reading, 1381–1382 Splice variants, 36b Splicing, RNA, 30f, 53 Spontaneous miniature synaptic potentials, 334f Index


Spontaneous otoacoustic emission, 616f,


Spontaneous pain, 481

Sprains, nociceptive pain in, 474 Squire, Larry, 1294 SRY gene, 1261–1262, 1262f SRY transcription factor, 1261–1262 SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), 1511f, 1515, 1516f–1517f Stage fright, 1506 Stance, balance in, 884, 885b, 885f. See also Balance Stance phase, of walking, 788, 789f, 795 Stapedial reflex, 993 Stapes (footplate) anatomy of, 599f, 600 in hearing, 601, 602f–603f STAT3, 1133 State estimation Bayesian inference in, 720b observer model of, 722–723, 722f sensory and motor signals in, 719–723 theoretical frameworks for, 817–818, 817f State-dependent reflex reversal, 776 Stationary night blindness, 530 Statistical learning, 1303–1304 Status epilepticus, 1466 Staufen protein, 145 Steady state, at resting membrane potential, 195, 196f Steinlein, Ortrud, 1467 Stellate cells, 655–656, 658f–659f Stem cells embryonic, 1252–1253, 1252f induced pluripotent. See Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells Step cycle, 788, 789f Stepping. See Locomotion; Walking Stereocilia anatomy of, 604–605, 607f mechanoelectrical transduction near tips of, 609–610, 610f molecular composition of, 611–612, 612f Stereognosis, 442f, 444 Stereograms, random-dot, 552 Stereopsis, 552f, 554, 1212 Stereoscopic vision, 1217 Stereotropism, 1166–1167 Stereotypical patterns, in movement, 725–726, 726f Sternson, Scott, 1038 Steroid hormones biosynthesis of, 1262, 1264f receptor binding of, in sexual differentiation, 1265f, 1265t, 1266f Stevens, Charles F, 404 Stevens, Stanley S., 387 Steward, Oswald, 1327 Stickgold, Robert, 1091 Stiffness, muscle, 749 Stimulants, 1072t, 1074. See also Drug addiction

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Stimulation-produced analgesia, 488

Stimulus

conditioned, 1050, 1052f, 1306, 1307f

firing patterns of neurons as representation of, 388–390. See also Sensory neurons painful, 470 quantification of response to, 389b–390b, 389f, 390f, 1483 reinforcing, 1306 rewarding incentive, 1066 unconditioned, 1046, 1050, 1052f, 1306, 1307f Stimulus transduction, 391 Stimulus-response learning in cognitive therapy, 1474b hippocampus in, 1304, 1305f quantification of, 389b, 389f Stomatogastric ganglion (STG), 320, 321f Stopping bound, 1401 Storage, memory. See Memory storage Strabismus, 1212, 1217–1218, 1218f Strains, nociceptive pain in, 474 Strength, of reflexes, 780 Strength training on maximal force, 742 on muscle contraction speed, 742 Stress, depression and, 1508–1509, 1508f Stress responses, glucocorticoid coordination of, 1275 Stretch reflex, 62–64 in clinical exams, 780 hyperactive, 780 hypoactive or absent, 780 knee-jerk, 62, 62f, 66, 66f monosynaptic pathways in, 762, 763f, 765–766, 767f of quadriceps muscle, 274, 275f reciprocal innervation in, 762 signaling in, 68–69, 69f spinal, 762, 763f, 764b, 765f Stretch reflex loop, continuous action of, 773 Stretch-gated channel, physical models of, 172, 173f Stretch-sensitive receptors, 62 Stretch-shorten cycle, 757f, 758 Striate cortex, in visual processing, 501 Striatum in action selection, 942f, 943 anatomy of, 933f, 934, 934f degeneration in Huntington disease, 1545, 1547t physiology of, 934 in reinforcement learning, 944, 945f, 1304, 1305f signals from cerebral cortex, thalamus, and ventral midbrain to, 934 Strick, Peter, 911 Stringed instrument players, hand representation in motor cortex in, 1335f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1638

Stroke

aphasia in, 1382

locomotor deficits in, 811

Stumbling, corrective reaction to, 799 Subcutaneous mechanoreceptors, 415t Subfornical organ (SFO) anatomy of, 1014f, 1015 in fluid balance, 1032, 1032f in thirst drive, 1033 Subjective reports with behavioral observation, 1483–1484 of emotions, 1047b malingering and hysteria on, 1485 verification of, 1484–1485, 1484f Subphonemic units, 1371 Subsequent memory paradigm/task, 121, 1298 Substance abuse. See Drug addiction; specific substances Substance P in dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 477f in neurogenic inflammation, 479, 480f in spinal-cord dorsal horn pain nociceptors, 475–476, 478f Substantia gelatinosa, of spinal cord dorsal horn, 474, 475f Substantia nigra pars compacta, 935 Substantia nigra pars reticulata anatomy of, 934f, 935 functions of, 935 superior colliculus inhibition by, 873f Subthalamic nucleus in action selection, 942f, 943 anatomy of, 933f, 934, 934f connections to basal ganglia, 936, 936f functions of, 934–935 locomotor region of, 800 signals from cerebral cortex, thalamus, and ventral midbrain to, 934 Sucking, pattern generator neurons on, 994 Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 1002, 1002f–1003f Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), 1466 Suggestibility, 1308 Suicide, with depression, 1502t, 1503 Sulci, 16, 17f Summation spatial, 293, 293f, 774f temporal, 292, 293f Superior cerebellar peduncle, 912, 912f Superior colliculus basal ganglia inhibition of, 873–874, 873f lesions of, on saccades, 875 neuron organization in, 872f rostral, in visual fixation, 873 saccade control by, 871–875, 873f. See also Saccades, superior colliculus control of sound localization in, 665, 666f visuomotor integration in, 871–875, 873f Superior olivary complex, 657–663, 663f feedback to cochlea from, 662–664

lateral, interaural intensity differences in,

659, 661–662, 662f

lateral lemniscus of, in responses in

inferior colliculus, 663–664 medial, interaural time differences map from, 657, 659, 662f Superior orbital fissure, 984f, 986 Superior salivatory nucleus, 989f, 991 Superior temporal sulcus, in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f Superior vestibular nerve, 630f, 632 Supplementary eye field, 875 Supplementary motor area anatomy of, 819, 822f in contextual control of voluntary actions, 829–830 in postural control, 905 Supplementary motor complex, in control of voluntary actions, 829–831, 829b, 830f Suprachiasmatic nucleus in body clock control, 1090 in circadian rhythm of sleep-wake cycle, 1088, 1089f, 1090, 1091f spontaneous pacemaker firing of neurons in, 231, 232f Surface receptors, 1108 Surround inhibition, 1456–1457, 1456f, 1457f Survival, of neurons. See Neuron(s), survival of Survival motor neuron (SMN), 1428, 1429f Sustained neurons, 531, 532f Swallowing, pattern generator neurons on, 994 Sweat glands, exocrine, acetylcholine in, 1146, 1146f Sweet taste receptor, 698–699, 698f–699f Swets, John, 389b Swimming, 786–788, 788f, 792, 794f–795f Swing phase, of walking. See Walking Symmetric division, in neural progenitor cell proliferation, 1131, 1132f Sympathetic division, autonomic system, 1016–1018, 1017f Sympathetic ganglia, 1016–1018, 1017f, 1018f Sympathetic oculomotor nerves, 864b Symporter, 197f, 198, 375 Synapse(s) age-related changes in, 1563, 1565f astrocytes in development of, 149 axo-axonic. See Axo-axonic synapses central, development of, 1198–1204. See also Synapse formation chemical. See Synapse, chemical components of, 239 electrical. See Synapse, electrical elimination, after birth, 1204–1205, 1204f formation of. See Synapse formation history of study of, 241 integration of. See Synaptic integration

19/01/21 9:18 AM

lamina-specific

in olfactory system, 1184–1185, 1185f

in retinal, 1184f

in retinal ganglion cells, 1182–1184 nonsilent, 1346–1347 number of, 1324 plasticity of. See Synaptic plasticity rectifying, 244 silent, 1204–1205, 1345, 1346f stabilization of, in critical period closing, 1223–1224, 1224f structure of, 57f, 58 transmission by. See Synaptic transmission trigger zone proximity of, 294, 295f ultrastructure of, 1198, 1200f Synapse, chemical coexistence and interaction with electrical synapses, 251–252 discovery of, 241–242 functional properties of, 242, 242t, 243f signal amplification in, 248–251 mechanisms of, 248–249, 249f postsynaptic receptors in ion channel gating by, 250–251, 251f neurotransmitter action and, 249–250 structure of, 242, 248, 248f synaptic transmission at, 248–249, 249f Synapse, electrical coexistence and interaction with chemical synapses, 251–252 discovery of, 241–242 functional properties of, 242, 242t, 243f signal transmission in, 242–244 in crayfish, 243–244, 243f gap-junction channels in, 244–247, 245f, 246f. See also Gap-junction channels graded, 244, 244f interconnected cell firing in, rapid and synchronous, 247–248, 247f structure of, 242 Synapse formation, 1181–1208 of central synapses, 1198–1204 general principles of, 1198, 1200f glial cells in, 1205–1207, 1206f microglial cells in, 1205, 1207f neurotransmitter receptor localization, 1198–1199, 1201f organizing molecule patterning of central nerve terminals in, 1199–1204, 1202f, 1203f synapse ultrastructure in, 1198, 1200f differentiation in, at neuromuscular junction, 1189–1190 acetylcholine receptor gene transcription in, 1196–1197, 1197f cell types in, 1189 development in general features of, 1189–1190, 1192f sequential stages of, 1189–1190, 1191f maturation steps in, 1197–1198, 1199f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1639

of motor nerve terminal, muscle fibers

in, 1190–1191, 1193f

of postsynaptic muscle membrane,

motor nerve in, 1192–1196, 1192f–1194f highlights, 1207–1998 key processes in, 1104–1105, 1181–1182 target recognition in, 1182–1188 input direction to postsynaptic cell domain in, 1187–1188, 1187f neural activity sharpening of synaptic specificity in, 1187–1188, 1188f–1189f recognition molecules in, 1182–1184, 1183f–1186f Synapse specificity, in long-term potentiation, 1350 Synapse-specific growth, CPEB as selfperpetuating switch of, 1328–1329, 1329f Synapsins, 344f, 345 Synaptic bouton, 255, 256f Synaptic capture, 1326f, 1327, 1328f Synaptic cleft anatomy of, 57f, 58 in neuromuscular junction, 255, 256f neurotransmitter removal from, on transmission, 256f, 371 Synaptic connections experience in refinement of, 1210–1234 activity-dependent, 1225–1229, 1227f–1228f in binocular circuits. See Visual cortex, binocular circuit development in critical periods in. See Critical periods highlights, 1233–1234 plasticity of, 1210–1211 sensitive periods in, 1211 social behaviors and, 1211–1212, 1213f visual perception and, 1212–1213 formation of, 1104 loss of, in schizophrenia, 1494, 1498, 1498f Synaptic delay, 242t, 244, 329 Synaptic depression, 350, 352f–353f Synaptic efficacy, 337 Synaptic facilitation (potentiation), 350, 352f–353f Synaptic inputs, to neuron, 231, 232f Synaptic integration, 273–299 complexity of, 273–274 of excitatory and inhibitory actions into single output, 291–298 dendrite amplification of synaptic input in, 295–297, 296f, 298f to fire action potential at initial segment, 292–293, 292f GABAergic neurons targets in, 293–295, 294f, 295f neuronal integration in, 291–292 serotonin action at inotropic receptors in, 291 temporal and spatial summation in, 292–293, 293f Index


excitatory and inhibitory synapses in,

274–277, 275f, 276f

highlights, 298–299

history of study of, 274 inhibitory, 224–227 Cl -channel opening and, 288–291, 289f ionotropic receptors in, 287–288 ionotropic glutamate receptors in. See Glutamate receptors (receptor-channels), ionotropic Synaptic plasticity definition of, 240, 241 in drug addiction, 1075 Hebbian, 108, 109f in hippocampus. See Hippocampus in learning and memory, 107–109 long-term, NMDA receptors and, 284, 286f–287f short-term, 350, 352f–353f in transmitter release. See Transmitter release, synaptic plasticity in Synaptic potentials grading of, 66–67, 67t quantal, 332 in reflex action, 68, 69f spontaneous miniature, 334f Synaptic pruning in long-term habituation, 1324 in schizophrenia, 1494, 1497, 1498f Synaptic reliability, 337 Synaptic strength, 335b–336b Synaptic stripping, 1240 Synaptic tagging, 1328, 1328f Synaptic terminals, 274, 276, 276f Synaptic transmission. See also Synapse, chemical; Synapse, electrical in autonomic system, 1019, 1021, 1022f. See also Autonomic system directly gated. See Neuromuscular junction (NMJ, end-plate) disorders of. See Neuromuscular junction disorders fast, 312, 314f highlights, 252 in implicit memory storage. See Memory, implicit, synaptic transmission in long-lasting consequences of, with second messengers, 317, 319f long-term depression of, in memory, 1353, 1356f, 1357 modulation of, 317, 319–321, 321f. See also Second messengers overall perspective of, 239–240 slow, 313, 314f Synaptic vesicles, 68 exocytosis in, 345–347, 370 Ca 2+ binding to synaptotagmin in, 347, 348f–349f SNARE proteins in, 344f, 345–347, 346f synapsins in, 344f, 345 transmembrane proteins in, 344f

19/01/21 9:18 AM
lamina-specific

in olfactory system, 1184–1185, 1185f

in retinal, 1184f

in retinal ganglion cells, 1182–1184 nonsilent, 1346–1347 number of, 1324 plasticity of. See Synaptic plasticity rectifying, 244 silent, 1204–1205, 1345, 1346f stabilization of, in critical period closing, 1223–1224, 1224f structure of, 57f, 58 transmission by. See Synaptic transmission trigger zone proximity of, 294, 295f ultrastructure of, 1198, 1200f Synapse, chemical coexistence and interaction with electrical synapses, 251–252 discovery of, 241–242 functional properties of, 242, 242t, 243f signal amplification in, 248–251 mechanisms of, 248–249, 249f postsynaptic receptors in ion channel gating by, 250–251, 251f neurotransmitter action and, 249–250 structure of, 242, 248, 248f synaptic transmission at, 248–249, 249f Synapse, electrical coexistence and interaction with chemical synapses, 251–252 discovery of, 241–242 functional properties of, 242, 242t, 243f signal transmission in, 242–244 in crayfish, 243–244, 243f gap-junction channels in, 244–247, 245f, 246f. See also Gap-junction channels graded, 244, 244f interconnected cell firing in, rapid and synchronous, 247–248, 247f structure of, 242 Synapse formation, 1181–1208 of central synapses, 1198–1204 general principles of, 1198, 1200f glial cells in, 1205–1207, 1206f microglial cells in, 1205, 1207f neurotransmitter receptor localization, 1198–1199, 1201f organizing molecule patterning of central nerve terminals in, 1199–1204, 1202f, 1203f synapse ultrastructure in, 1198, 1200f differentiation in, at neuromuscular junction, 1189–1190 acetylcholine receptor gene transcription in, 1196–1197, 1197f cell types in, 1189 development in general features of, 1189–1190, 1192f sequential stages of, 1189–1190, 1191f maturation steps in, 1197–1198, 1199f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1639

of motor nerve terminal, muscle fibers

in, 1190–1191, 1193f

of postsynaptic muscle membrane,

motor nerve in, 1192–1196, 1192f–1194f highlights, 1207–1998 key processes in, 1104–1105, 1181–1182 target recognition in, 1182–1188 input direction to postsynaptic cell domain in, 1187–1188, 1187f neural activity sharpening of synaptic specificity in, 1187–1188, 1188f–1189f recognition molecules in, 1182–1184, 1183f–1186f Synapse specificity, in long-term potentiation, 1350 Synapse-specific growth, CPEB as selfperpetuating switch of, 1328–1329, 1329f Synapsins, 344f, 345 Synaptic bouton, 255, 256f Synaptic capture, 1326f, 1327, 1328f Synaptic cleft anatomy of, 57f, 58 in neuromuscular junction, 255, 256f neurotransmitter removal from, on transmission, 256f, 371 Synaptic connections experience in refinement of, 1210–1234 activity-dependent, 1225–1229, 1227f–1228f in binocular circuits. See Visual cortex, binocular circuit development in critical periods in. See Critical periods highlights, 1233–1234 plasticity of, 1210–1211 sensitive periods in, 1211 social behaviors and, 1211–1212, 1213f visual perception and, 1212–1213 formation of, 1104 loss of, in schizophrenia, 1494, 1498, 1498f Synaptic delay, 242t, 244, 329 Synaptic depression, 350, 352f–353f Synaptic efficacy, 337 Synaptic facilitation (potentiation), 350, 352f–353f Synaptic inputs, to neuron, 231, 232f Synaptic integration, 273–299 complexity of, 273–274 of excitatory and inhibitory actions into single output, 291–298 dendrite amplification of synaptic input in, 295–297, 296f, 298f to fire action potential at initial segment, 292–293, 292f GABAergic neurons targets in, 293–295, 294f, 295f neuronal integration in, 291–292 serotonin action at inotropic receptors in, 291 temporal and spatial summation in, 292–293, 293f Index


excitatory and inhibitory synapses in,

274–277, 275f, 276f

highlights, 298–299

history of study of, 274 inhibitory, 224–227 Cl -channel opening and, 288–291, 289f ionotropic receptors in, 287–288 ionotropic glutamate receptors in. See Glutamate receptors (receptor-channels), ionotropic Synaptic plasticity definition of, 240, 241 in drug addiction, 1075 Hebbian, 108, 109f in hippocampus. See Hippocampus in learning and memory, 107–109 long-term, NMDA receptors and, 284, 286f–287f short-term, 350, 352f–353f in transmitter release. See Transmitter release, synaptic plasticity in Synaptic potentials grading of, 66–67, 67t quantal, 332 in reflex action, 68, 69f spontaneous miniature, 334f Synaptic pruning in long-term habituation, 1324 in schizophrenia, 1494, 1497, 1498f Synaptic reliability, 337 Synaptic strength, 335b–336b Synaptic stripping, 1240 Synaptic tagging, 1328, 1328f Synaptic terminals, 274, 276, 276f Synaptic transmission. See also Synapse, chemical; Synapse, electrical in autonomic system, 1019, 1021, 1022f. See also Autonomic system directly gated. See Neuromuscular junction (NMJ, end-plate) disorders of. See Neuromuscular junction disorders fast, 312, 314f highlights, 252 in implicit memory storage. See Memory, implicit, synaptic transmission in long-lasting consequences of, with second messengers, 317, 319f long-term depression of, in memory, 1353, 1356f, 1357 modulation of, 317, 319–321, 321f. See also Second messengers overall perspective of, 239–240 slow, 313, 314f Synaptic vesicles, 68 exocytosis in, 345–347, 370 Ca 2+ binding to synaptotagmin in, 347, 348f–349f SNARE proteins in, 344f, 345–347, 346f synapsins in, 344f, 345 transmembrane proteins in, 344f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Synaptic vesicles (Cont.):

fusion of, 347–349, 348f–349f, 350f

large dense-core, 144f, 150, 359, 365, 370

small, 150, 359 transmitter storage and release from, 333–343 active zone in, 333–334 efficacy and reliability of, 337 electron microscopic discovery of, 328f, 333 exocytosis and endocytosis in, 337–338, 339f capacitance measurements of kinetics of, 338, 340f–341f fusion pore in exocytosis in, 338, 341, 342f probability of, calculating, 335b–336b probability of release in, low, 337 steps in, 341, 343f Synaptobrevin, 344f, 345, 346f Synaptotagmin, 344f, 345, 347, 348f–349f Synchronization, of seizure focus, 1454f, 1456–1457, 1456f, 1457f Synchronized neurons, in auditory cortex, 672, 672f Syncytium, 8 Synergy, muscle, 756 Syntax, 1372 Syntaxin, 280, 344f, 346f Synuclein, 1574 System A transporter (SAT), 366f System N transporter (SN1/SN2), 366f T T1R taste receptor family, 698–702, 698f–700f. See also Gustatory system, sensory receptors and cells in TAARs (trace amine-associated receptors), 684 Tabes dorsalis, from syphilis, 464 Tachykinins, 368t Tactile acuity/sensitivity in different body regions, 443f fingerprint structure in sensitivity of, 440b–441b, 440f in hand, 443f measurement of, 439–444, 443f receptive fields in, 438–439, 442f in sensorimotor control, 733b, 733f variations in, 442–444 Tactile stimulation, on glucocorticoid receptor gene, 1275 TAG1, in axon growth and guidance, 1170f–1171f Tagging, synaptic, 1327, 1328f Takahashi, Joseph, 40 Tangential migration, 1138–1140, 1140f Tangier disease, 1433t Tanner, Wilson, 389b Target recognition, synaptic, 1182–1187

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1640

neural activity sharpening of synaptic

specificity in, 1187–1188, 1188f,

1189f

recognition molecules in selective synapse formation in, 1182–1184, 1183f–1186f synaptic inputs directed to discrete postsynaptic cell domains in, 1186–1187, 1187f Targeted mutagenesis, in mice, 35b–36b, 36f TARP (transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein), 279, 280f Tartini, Giuseppe, 618 Task execution, postural orientation for, 892 Task selection, 817f, 818 Taste. See also Gustatory system vs. flavor, 696 flavor perception and, 702f graded sensitivity of chemoreceptors in, 393 highlights, 704 sensory neurons in transmission to gustatory cortex, 702, 703f submodalities or qualities of, 696 Taste aversion, 1307 Taste buds, 696–697, 697f Taste cells, 697, 697f Taste pores, 697, 697f Taste receptors. See Gustatory system, sensory receptors and cells in Tau proteins aggregation of, 1571f, 1573–1574 in dendrites, 1157, 1158f in hippocampal neuronal polarity, 1157, 1158f in neurofibrillary tangles, 1573–1574, 1574f in neurological disorders, 141b, 142f in normal neurons, 139, 141b in Parkinson disease type 17, 1573 TDP43 mutations, 1427, 1427t Tectorial membrane, 604, 605f Tegmental area, ventral. See Ventral tegmental area Tello, Francisco, 1243 Tello-Muñóz, Fernando, 1192 Temperature body, regulation of, 1013t, 1029–1031, 1029b spinothalamic system in, 450f–451f thermal receptors for, 415t, 422–424, 423f Temporal area, middle, in visual processing, 504f–505f, 505 Temporal area lesions, 878 Temporal binding, 1480, 1480f Temporal coding, of time-varying sounds, 671–673, 672f Temporal contrast sensitivity, 534b, 595f Temporal cortex/lobe. See also specific areas anatomy of, 12b, 13f, 14f, 16 in autism spectrum disorder, 1525f, 1539–1540

damage/lesions

agnosia and, 567–568, 567f

agnosias from, 568

amnesia after, 1482 less common aphasias and, 1387–1388, 1387f Wernicke aphasia with, 1379t, 1384, 1385f face-selective areas in, 120–121, 569–570, 570f function of, 16 hyperexcitability of, 1469–1470, 1470f inferior, in object recognition. See Object recognition, inferior temporal cortex in lesions of, on smooth-pursuit eye movements, 878–879 medial. See Medial temporal lobe superior, in mentalizing, 1527, 1528f Temporal filtering in fMRI, 116 in retina, via synapses and feedback circuits, 524f, 526f–527f, 532f, 535f, 537 Temporal lobe epilepsy, 1463, 1464b–1465b, 1464f, 1465f Temporal patterning, 396 Temporal summation, 292, 293f Temporal thickness of the present, 1409 Temporoammonic pathway, 1340 Temporoparietal cortex, in postural control, 905 Tendon, types of arrangements in, 752f Tendon jerk, 780 Tendon reflexes, 780 TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation), 488 Terminal tremor, 917, 917f Testosterone, 1262, 1263–1264, 1264f Testosterone receptor, 1264, 1266f Tetanic contraction (tetanus), 739–740, 740f Tetanic stimulation, 351, 352f–353f, 1342, 1343f Tetracycline system, for regulation of transgene expression, 36f, 38f Tetracycline transactivator (tTA), 36b, 38f Tetrodotoxin on Na + channels, 263, 1218 in voltage-clamp studies, 213, 216, 216f Teuber, Hans-Lukas, 579 Texture perception, 443f, 444, 445f Thalamic nuclei basal ganglia connections to, 937 nociceptive and sensory information relay to cerebral cortex by, 82–84, 82f, 484–485, 485f subdivisions of, 82–83, 82f tactile and proprioceptive information processing in, 450 vestibular projections to, 638f, 645 Thalamic pain (Dejerine-Roussy syndrome), 485 Thalamocortical neurons

19/01/21 9:18 AM

in arousal, 1006–1007, 1007f

in generalized onset seizures, 1461–1463,

1462f

rerouting of, on sensory functions, 1126, 1127f in sleep, 1082, 1083f in visual cortex, remodeling of, 1221–1223, 1223f Thalamus, 12b, 14f Theory of mass action, 18 Theory of mind, 1413–1414, 1525 Thermal nociceptors, 471, 471f, 474, 475f Thermal receptors, 415t characteristics of, 392t, 393 dorsal root ganglia neuron axon diameter in, 410–412 for skin temperature changes, 422–424, 423f Thermal sensations, 408, 422–424 afferent fibers in, 423–424 slow changes in, 423 transient receptor potential (TRP) receptor-channels in, 423–424, 423f types of, 423–424 Thermogenesis, sympathetically driven, 1029b Thermoregulations. See Body temperature, regulation of Theta waves, EEG, 1450 Thick filaments, 745–747, 748f–749f Thimerosal, 1530 Thin filaments, 745–747, 748f–749f Thioacylation, 148 Thirst drive, 1033 Thompson, Richard, 1314 Thoracic spinal cord, 13f, 78–79, 78f Thorndike, Edgar, 1306 Thorndike, Edward Lee, 944 Threat conditioning, 1317 classical, facilitation of synaptic transmission in, 1317–1319, 1320f of defensive responses in fruit flies, cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway in, 1330–1331 in mammals, amygdala in, 1331–1334, 1331f–1333f, 1335f Threshold for action potential initiation, 211, 219–220, 219f perceptual discrimination, 518 Thrombospondin, 1205 Thunberg's illusion/thermal grill, 487b, 487f Thurstone, L.L., 389b Thymomas, in myasthenia gravis, 1434 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 1027f, 1028, 1029t Tiling, of dendrites, 1160, 1162f Tilt perception of, 645 postural response to, 895–896 TIM protein, 43f Time constant, membrane, 204

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1641

Time constants (T


, T


, T


), in fMRI, 113f,


Time delays, in sensorimotor control, 714f,

715 Timothy syndrome, L-type Ca 2+ in, 332 Tinnitus, 624 Tip link, of stereocilium, 609, 610f. See also Stereocilia Tissue inflammation, 476, 479 Titin, 747, 748f–749f TMC1/2, 611–613, 612f TMIE, 612, 612f TMS. See Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) Toates, Frederick, 1038 Tobacco, 1072t Todd paralysis, 1461 Tolerance, 1072 Tolman, Edward, 100, 1288, 1360 Tone, postural, 886. See also Posture Tonegawa, Susumu, 1357 Tonic mode, of locus ceruleus neurons, 1005, 1005f Tonic phase, 1449 Tonic-clonic movements, 1449 Tonic-clonic seizures, 1449. See also Seizure(s), generalized onset Tononi, Giulio, 1092 Tonotopic maps, 604 Top-down processes in associative recall of visual memories, 578, 579f attention as, cortical connections in, 559 in high-level visual processing, 578 perceptual task in, 560 scene segmentation in, 555 in sensory processing, 404–405 spatial attention in, 560 Torpedo marmorata, 257f Torque interaction, in cerebellar ataxia, 909, 910f muscle, 754–755, 755f totterer mutant mouse, 1463, 1467, 1468 Touch, 435–467 active, 436–437, 462f acuity/sensitivity of. See Tactile acuity/ sensitivity central touch system in. See Central touch system deficits in, 464–466, 465f, 466f exteroception in, 408–409 highlights, 466–467 information in successive central synapses for, 460–466 active touch on sensorimotor circuits in posterior parietal cortex in, 463–464 cognitive touch in secondary somatosensory cortex in, 460–462, 462f, 463f motion-, direction-, and orientationsensitive neurons in, 460, 461f Index


spatial arrangement of

excitatory/inhibitory inputs to,

459f, 460

channel mechanoreceptors for, 415t, 416f, 437f, 438t. See also Cutaneous mechanoreceptors passive, 436–437, 462f Tourette syndrome, 949 Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs), 684 Trace amines, 363 Trajectory, local movement cues in shape of, 554–555 Transcortical motor aphasia brain injury in, 1386 differential diagnosis of, 1379t symptoms of, 1379t, 1386 Transcortical sensory aphasia brain injury in, 1386 differential diagnosis of, 1379t symptoms of, 1379t, 1386 Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) for depression, 1518 of motor cortical activity, 811 Transcription, 27, 30f, 36b Transcription factors basic helix-loop-helix. See Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in drug addiction, 1074–1075 in forebrain patterning, 1123–1124, 1126f in gene expression, 29 SRY, 1261–1262 transport of, 144 Transcriptional oscillator, in circadian rhythm, 34, 40–42, 41f–43f Transcriptome, 53 Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), 488 Transfer, cotranslational, 147 Transgenic expression developmental abnormalities from, 1351 in flies, 39b, 39f in mice, 35b–36b, 39b, 39f tetracycline system for regulation of, 36b, 38f Trans-Golgi network, 150 Transience, in memory, 1308, 1309 Transient neurons, 531, 532f Transient receptor potential (TRP) receptors/channels in itch sensation, 425–426 in pain nociceptors, 472, 473f P-regions in, 178–179 in thermal sensation, 423–424, 423f, 1030 in touch sensation, 416 Transitional probabilities, for words in continuous speech in infants, 1377–1378 Translation, 27, 30f, 53 Translational vestibulo-ocular reflex. See Vestibulo-ocular reflexes Transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein (TARP), 279, 280f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

+


Index

Transmembrane receptors, genes encoding,


Transmembrane regions, of voltage-gated

channels, 221, 223f Transmission, synaptic. See Synaptic transmission Transmitter(s) false, 365, 367. See also Fluorescent false neurotransmitters (FFNs) storage of, in synaptic vesicles, 333–343. See also Synaptic vesicles, transmitter storage and release from Transmitter release, 324–356. See also specific neurotransmitters Ca 2+ influx in, 327–332 Ca 2+ channel classes in, 328f, 329, 331t, 332 dual functions of Ca 2+ in, 327 presynaptic Ca 2+ concentration in, 329, 330f presynaptic terminal active zones in, 327–332, 328f via voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels, 327, 327f highlights, 354–356 presynaptic terminal depolarization in, 324–327, 325f probability of, calculating, 335b–336b quantal units of, 332–333, 334f synaptic plasticity in, 350–354, 352f–353f activity-dependent intracellular free Ca 2+ changes in, on release, 351 axo-axonic synapses on presynaptic terminals in, 351, 353–354, 354f definition of, 350 synaptic vesicles in, 333–343. See also Synaptic vesicles, transmitter storage and release from exocytosis in, 345–347. See also Exocytosis Transmitter-gated channel. See Ligandgated channels Transplantation dopaminergic cells, 1252, 1252f neural precursors, 1253–1254, 1253f, 1254f nonneuronal cell/progenitor, 1255, 1255f oligodendrocyte, for myelin restoration, 1255, 1255f Transport vesicles, 135, 136f Transporter. See specific types Transporter molecules, for neurotransmitters, 375 Transporter proteins, in glial cells, 133 Transposable elements, 35b, 39b Tranylcypromine, 1514, 1516f–1517f TREM2 gene mutations, 1428, 1575–1576 trembler mouse, 155b, 155f Tremor action (intention), 909 terminal, 917, 917f Trial-and-error learning, 1308 Trichromacy, 539 Tricyclic antidepressants, 1514–1515, 1516f–1517f Trigeminal ganglion neurons, 427, 428f–429f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1642

Trigeminal motor nucleus, 989f, 991

Trigeminal nerve (CN V)

information conveyed by, 429

mandibular division of, 983, 985f maxillary division of, 983, 985f as mixed nerve, 982 ophthalmic division of, 982–983, 984f, 985f origin in brain stem, 983f sensory loss in, 983 skull exit of, 984f Trigeminal neuralgia, 474 Trigeminal nucleus mesencephalic, 989f, 990 principal sensory, 989f, 990 spinal, 987, 989f, 990 Trigger zone, 66f, 67, 292 axon, 231 dendritic, 292, 292f in reflex action, 68, 69f synaptic input integration to fire action potential at, 292, 292f Trisynaptic pathway, 1340, 1341f Tritanopia, 539 Trk receptors, 1148, 1150, 1150f TrkA, 1143f TrkC, 1143f Trochlear nerve (CN IV) in extraocular eye muscle control, 863, 863f, 982 lesions of, 864b, 865f origin in brain stem, 983f skull exit of, 984f Trochlear nucleus, 989f, 991–992 Tropomyosin, 746, 748f–749f Troponin, 746, 748f–749f TRP receptors. See Transient receptor potential (TRP) receptors TRPM2 receptor channel, 1030 TRPM8 receptor channel, 472, 1030 TRPV1 receptor-channel, 472 TRPV2 receptor-channel, 472 Trypsin, 368 Tryptophan hydroxylase, 363 Tsao, Doris, 569 t-SNAREs, 150, 345 tTA (tetracycline transactivator), 36b, 38f T-type Ca 2+ channel, 331t, 332 Tuberal hypothalamus, 1013 Tuberous sclerosis complex, 1469 d-Tubocurarine, 1434 Tubulins, 139, 140f, 1163f Tufted cell, 683f, 688, 690, 690f Tulving, Endel, 1300 Tumor, 474, 479 Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), in pain, 481f Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family, 1150 Tuning curve, of neuron, 958, 960, 960f Turk-Browne, Nicholas, 1303 Twins, fraternal vs. identical, 27 Twist, 1141 Twitch contraction, 739–740, 740f, 741f Two-point discrimination tests, 443f, 444, 445f Tympanic membrane, 600

Tympanum, 599, 599f

Type 1. See Rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1)

fibers; Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers Type 2 fibers. See Rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fibers; Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers; Slowly adapting type 2 (SA2) fibers Typical absence seizures, 1449, 1461, 1462f Tyrosine hydroxylase, 362b, 363 Tyrosine kinase receptor. See Receptor tyrosine kinases U UBE3A deletion, 1533, 1533f Ubiquitin, 141b, 149 Ubiquitination, 149 UBQLN2 mutations, 1427 Ultrastructure localization, of chemical messengers, 373b–374b, 373f Umami taste receptor, 698f–700f, 699–700 Uncertainty, in sensorimotor control, 714, 714f Unconditioned stimulus (US), 1046, 1050, 1052f, 1306, 1307f Unconscious inferences, 1474 Unconscious mental process disorders history of study of, 1473 neural correlates of consciousness and, 1475–1476 Unconscious mental processes in control of action, 709–710, 1479–1481, 1480f–1481f awareness and urge to act in, 1480–1481 form agnosia and, 1480f, 1488 phantom limb and, 1481 unconscious guidance system in, 1479–1480, 1480f evidence for, 1412–1413, 1475 neural correlates of, 1474–1476, 1475f subjective reports of, 1483–1484 Uncoupling protein-1, 1029b Ungerleider, Leslie, 402 Unilateral neglect, 505, 1475, 1475f, 1477 Unimodal association cortex, 88, 89f Uniparental disomy, 1534 Unipolar depression. See Major depressive disorder Unipolar neurons, 59, 60f Univariate activation analysis, in fMRI, 117f, 118 Universal grammar, 19 Unstable surfaces, vestibular information for balance on, 895–897, 896f Unwin, Nigel, 265, 267 Upper motor neuron(s), 1426 Upper motor neuron disorders, 1426. See also Motor neuron diseases Urge to act, awareness and, 1480 US (unconditioned stimulus), 1046, 1050, 1052f, 1306, 1307f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

USH1 genes, 611, 614

Usher syndrome, 611

Utilization behavior syndrome, 829b

Utricle, 600f, 635, 635f

V Vaccines, autism spectrum disorder risk and, 1530–1531 VAChT (vesicular ACh transporter), 365, 366f Vacuolar apparatus, 135–137, 136f Vagus nerve (CN X) information conveyed by, 429, 985 injury of, 985 as mixed nerve, 1028 origin in brain stem, 983f projections of, 1019 stimulation, for seizure reduction, 1458b–1459b, 1458f Vale, Wylie, 1028 Vallbo, Åke, 419, 438, 773–774 Valproic acid for bipolar disorder, 1519–1520 for seizures, 1461 Value, in decision-making, 1408–1409 VAMP (vesicle-associated membrane protein), 344f, 345 Van Gogh, Vincent, 1417–1418 Vascular lesions of brain, in aging, 1567 Vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) anatomy of, 1014f, 1015 in fluid balance, 1032–1033, 1032f in thirst drive, 1033 Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) acetylcholine co-release with, 370 autonomic functions of, 1021, 1021t, 1022f Vasopressin functions of, 994, 1027 hypothalamic neurons on release of, 1027, 1028f on maternal bonding and social behaviors, 1275 in renal water excretion, 1031 on social behavior, 45, 46f synthesis of, 1027 V-ATPase, 345, 365 Vector averaging, 517, 517f Vegetative state, fMRI in, 125b Velocardiofacial (DiGeorge) syndrome, 48, 1492 Velocity storage, 640 Ventral, 11b, 11f Ventral columns, spinal cord, 77f, 78 Ventral horn, spinal cord, 76, 77f, 79 Ventral intraparietal area (VIP), 825, 826f–827f Ventral midbrain, input from basal ganglia, 939–940 Ventral premotor cortex (PMv) anatomy of, 819, 820f mirror neurons in, 838, 839f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1643

in perceptual decisions guiding motor

actions, 836, 838f

in planning for motor actions of hand,

835, 837f

Ventral respiratory group, 995 Ventral root, spinal cord, 77f, 79 Ventral stream anatomy of, 12b object recognition by, 565, 566f Ventral sulcus, spinal cord, 77f Ventral tegmental area dopamine synthesis in, 1422 dopaminergic projections from, 935, 1067–1068, 1067f Ventral visual pathways. See Visual pathways, ventral Ventrolateral group, thalamic nuclei, 82f, 83 Ventrolateral preoptic neurons, 1086 Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus, 1040–1041, 1040f Ventromedial prefrontal cortex, 1058–1059, 1058b Verbal information, in short-term memory, 1292 Verbal subsystem, 1292 Vergence, in depth perception, 554 Vergence eye movements, 861 Vergence system, 879–880 Vermis, 911, 912f Version eye movements, 861 Vertigo, 647 Vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP), 344f, 345 Vesicles neurotransmitter uptake by, 364–365, 366f small-molecule transmitters in, 359 transport of, 149–150 Vesicular ACh transporter (VAChT), 365, 366f Vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUTs) in energy balance, 1036f–1037f, 1037–1038 specificity of, 365, 366f Vesicular monoamine transporters (VMATs), 363–365, 366f Vesicular transporters, 365, 366f Vestibular apparatus/labyrinth. See also Vestibular system anatomy of, 630–631, 630f loss of, ataxia after, 896–897 receptor organs in, 631–636 anatomy and location of, 630–631, 631f hair cells. See Hair cells, in vestibular system otolith organs, 634–636, 635f semicircular canals. See Semicircular canals Vestibular hypermetria, 896 Vestibular hypofunction, 647–648 Vestibular membrane, 600f, 601 Vestibular nerves, 599f, 600f, 630f, 632 Vestibular nuclei Index


afferent and central projections to, 637f

functional columns of, 989f, 990

integration of signals from spinal cord,

cerebellum, and visual system by, 636–639 combined semicircular canal and otolith signals for, 638–639 commissural system for bilateral communication in, 636–638, 639f for head movement control, 639 output projections from, 638f, 914f, 915f in vestibular-ocular reflex, 641f. See also Vestibulo-ocular reflexes Vestibular nystagmus, 642, 642f Vestibular schwannoma, 986 Vestibular slow phase, 640, 642f Vestibular system, 629–649 bilateral hypofunction of, 647–648 caloric irrigation as diagnostic tool for, 647, 648f in cortex, 645–647, 646f highlights, 648–649 lesion, vertigo and nystagmus from, 647 in spatial orientation and navigation, 646–647 in thalamus, 645 vestibular apparatus in. See Vestibular apparatus/labyrinth vestibular nuclei in. See Vestibular nuclei vestibulo-ocular reflexes of. See Vestibulo-ocular reflexes Vestibulocerebellum. See also Cerebellum in balance, 901–902 input and output targets of, 911–912, 914f lesions of, on smooth-pursuit eye movements, 912, 916, 916f Vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII), 632, 983f, 984–985 Vestibulo-ocular reflexes activation of, 993 caloric test for evaluation of, 647, 648f cerebellar learning in, 643, 644f, 925, 927f in image stabilization on retina, 866, 993 neural circuits for head tilt in linear acceleration in, 897 in ocular stabilization during head movements, 639–644 as open-loop control system, 717 optokinetic responses in, 643 rotational, in compensation for head rotation, 640–642, 641f, 642f suppression of, for gaze shifts, 877–878 translational, in linear movement and head tilts, 642–643 Vestibulospinal tracts, in automatic postural response, 902 VGLUTs (vesicular glutamate transporters), 365, 366f in energy balance, 1036f–1037f, 1037–1038 specificity of, 365, 366f Vibration, touch receptors in detection of, 446, 447f, 448f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Vibratory flutter, discrimination of,

1395–1396, 1396f

Vibrissae, 456b–457b, 456f–457f

Viewpoint invariance, in object identification, 571 VIP. See Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) VIP (ventral intraparietal area), 825, 826f–827f Virilization, 1263 Visceral brain, 1049–1050 Visceral motor neurons, autonomic system, 1015–1016. See also Autonomic system Visceral sensations internal organ status from, 426 receptors for, 426 spinothalamic system in, 450f–451f Visceral sensory column, 989f, 990 Visceral sensory information, relay to brain, 1023, 1025f, 1026f Vision. See Visual perception; Visual processing Visual agnosia. See Agnosia Visual association circuits, 578–579, 579f Visual attributes, cortical representation of, 559–560, 562f Visual cortex activity-dependent development of, 1225–1227 afferent pathways from eyes to, 1214, 1214f areas of, 399, 400f, 547, 547f binocular circuit development in, 1213–1218 activity-dependent refinement of, 1225–1229, 1227f–1229f electrical activity patterns and, 1215–1218, 1218f, 1219f. See also Ocular dominance columns experience-independent neural activity and, 1224–1225, 1225f, 1226f postnatal experience and, 1213–1215, 1214f–1217f visual experience and, 1213–1215, 1214f–1215f binocular circuit remodeling in adults, 1231–1233 binocular circuit reorganization during critical period, 1219–1224 excitatory/inhibitory input balance and, 1214f, 1219–1220, 1220f, 1221f synaptic stabilization during, 1223–1224, 1224f synaptic structure alternation during, 1221, 1222f thalamic input remodeling during, 1217f, 1221–1223, 1223f hypercolumns in, 508, 510f–511f intrinsic circuitry of, 511f, 512–516, 514f–516f neuron response to stimuli in, 1214, 1215f

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1644

orientation columns in, 508–509,

510f–511f

pathways in. See Visual pathways

Visual fields, along visual pathway, 501, 502f Visual fixation, rostral superior colliculus in, 873 Visual memory, 573–579 associative recall of, 578–579, 579f implicit, on selectivity of neuronal responses in, 573, 575f interactions with working memory and long-term memory, 573–578, 576b hippocampus and medial temporal lobe in, 578 inferior temporal lobe in, 577, 578f neural activity in, 574–575, 577f on object recognition, 573 Visual neglect with right parietal lobe lesions, 589–591, 590f, 1410, 1411f unilateral, 505, 1475, 1475f, 1477 Visual neurons, 875, 876f Visual paired-association task, 576b, 576f Visual pathways dorsal information carried by, 402–403, 403f in movement guidance, 501–502, 505 vs. ventral pathway, 506 visual processing in, 503–506, 594f. See also Visual processing for eye movement, 501, 503f lesions of, 501, 502f for pupillary reflex and accommodation, 501, 503f ventral classical view of, 506 vs. dorsal pathway, 506 information carried by, 402–403 object recognition by, 504f–505f, 505 visual fields along, 502, 502f for visual processing, 501, 503f. See also Visual processing Visual perception complexity of, 1475, 1475f as constructive process continuation and contour saliency in, 497, 498f early thinking about, 496–497 figure vs. background in, 497, 498f fundamentals of, 496–497 gestalt on, 497, 498f levels of brain analysis in, 497, 500f organizational rules of, 497, 498f priming stimulus in, 497, 499f segmentation in, 497, 498f, 499f unified perception in, 497 overall perspective of, 381–382 visual experience and development of, 1212–1213 Visual pigment, 526f, 528–529, 528f, 529f Visual priming, 1303, 1303f Visual primitives, 547

Visual processing, 496–519. See also Visual

perception

for attention and action, 582–595

brain compensation for eye movements in, 582, 583f–584f motor commands for. See Saccades, brain stabilization of images during oculomotor proprioception in, 587–588, 588f, 589f highlights, 595–596 parietal cortex in visual information to motor system, 592–593 intraparietal neurons in, 593, 594F, 595, 595f pathways in, 593, 594f visual scrutiny drivers, 588–591 change blindness, 588, 590f in parietal lobe, 589–591, 589f priority map, 591b–592b, 591f, 592f columns of specialized neurons in, 508–512 advantages of, 512 cortical computational modules in, 512, 512f functional architecture, 510f–511f general functions of, 508 hypercolumns, 508–509 hypercolumns in, 510f–511f lateral geniculate nucleus projections in, 508–509, 511f ocular-dominance, 508, 510f–511f orientation columns, 508–509 orientation columns in, 510f–511f serial and parallel processing in, 512, 513f visual cortex functional architecture in, 508 of contours, 507–508 eye movement in, 501, 503f feed-forward representations in, 103–104, 103f form, color, and depth processing areas in, 502–506, 504f–505f geniculostriate pathway in, 499–502, 502f high-level, 564–580 highlights, 579–580 object recognition in, 564, 565f. See also Object recognition visual memory as component of. See Visual memory intermediate-level, 545–553 cognitive processes on, 560–562 context in, 546–547, 555–558 on brightness and color perception, 555–558, 557f on receptive-field properties, 558 cortical areas in, 547, 547f cortical connections in, 558–562 for contour integration and saliency, 551f, 558–559 cortical representation of visual attributes and shapes in visual search in, 559–560, 562f

19/01/21 9:18 AM

feedback projections in, 559

horizontal connections and

functional architecture in, 513f,

559 plasticity of, and perceptual learning, 559, 560f depth perception in, 550–554 border ownership in, 554, 554f DaVinci stereopsis in, 554 plane of fixation in, 550, 552f stereopsis in, 552, 552f vergence in, 554 expectation in, 546–547 experience-dependent changes in cortical circuitry in, 546–547 fundamental elements of, 545–547, 546f highlights, 562–563 illusory contours and perceptual fill-in in, 545–546, 546f internal models of object geometry in, 547–550, 548f–550f complex cells in, 548, 548f contextual modulation in, 513f, 549, 551f contour integration in, 549–550, 551f end-inhibited receptive fields in, 549, 550f moving stimuli in, 550 orientation selectivity in, 547–548, 548f simple cells in, 548, 548f visual cortex neurons in, 547–548 local movement cues in object and trajectory shape in, 554–555 aperture problem and barber-pole illusion in, 554–555, 556f directional selectivity of movement in, 554, 555f visual primitives in, 547 intrinsic cortical circuitry in, 511f, 512–516, 514f–516f in language learning, 1376 low-level. See Retina neural codes in, 517–518, 517f pupillary reflex and accommodation in, 501, 503f receptive fields at successive relays in, 506–508, 507f–509f streams of, 501, 565, 566f visual pathways for, cerebral cortex. See Visual pathways Visual recall, circuits for, 578–579, 579f Visual search, cortical representation of visual attributes and shapes in, 559–560, 562f Visual-vertical perception, 645 Visuomotor neurons, 875 Visuospatial constancy, 645 Visuospatial information, in short-term memory, 1292 Visuospatial subsystem, 1292 Visuotopic map, 506

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1645

Visuotopic organization, 508

Vitamin A, 529


.


See Membrane potential (Vm channels,


)

VMATs (vesicular monoamine transporters), 363–365, 366f VNO (vomeronasal organ), 691, 692f, 1272, 1273f Vocal feedback, during speaking, 677, 678f Voltage sensor, 173 Voltage-clamp studies, 212–217 development of, 212–213, 214f end-plate potential studies using, 259–260, 259f experimental protocol, 213, 214b–215b, 214f–215f K + and Na + interdependence and, 212–213, 214b–215b membrane conductance calculation in, 217–219, 218b, 218f membrane depolarization in, 216, 217f sequential activation of K + and Na + currents in, 213, 216, 216f Voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels. See Ca 2+ channels, voltage-gated Voltage-gated ion channels, 132, 166, 190. See also specific types in central pattern generator function, 796b diversity of, genetic factors in, 177, 178f, 179f, 225, 226f energy for, 173–174 genetic defects in, 1441, 1443f inactivation of, 174, 174f mutations in, epilepsy and, 1467–1469, 1468f physical models of, 172f, 172 rates of transition in, 173 Voltage-gated ion channels, in action potential, 212–233 electrophysiologic measurements of, 170b, 220–222 Na + channel opening/closing in, charge redistribution in, 220–222, 223f in patch-clamp studies, 220, 222f ion flow through, 212–220 historical studies of, 212, 212f ionic conductance increase in, 212, 212f K + and Na + currents in on conductances, 217–219, 218b, 218f–219f voltage clamp recording of. See Voltage-clamp studies Na + and K + channels in activation and inactivation gates in, 218–219 Hodgkin-Huxley model of, 219–220, 219f inactivation in, 218–219, 219f refractory period and, 220, 221f neuron excitability properties and, 229–231, 230f, 231f Voltage-gated K + channels. See K + voltage-gated Index


Voltage-gated K

+

current, on conductance,

217–219, 218b, 218f–219f

Voltage-gated Na

+

channels. See Na

+

channels, voltage-gated Voltage-gated Na + current, on conductance, 217–219, 218b, 218f–219f Voltage-junction channel, gene superfamily in, 177, 178f Volume transmission, of neurotransmitters, 935 Voluntary movement, 815–858. See also Sensorimotor control highlights, 856–858 as intention to act, 816–822 delay period to isolate neural activity from execution of action, 821, 823f descending motor commands transmitted by corticospinal tract in, 819–821 frontal and parietal cortical regions in, 818–819, 820f, 822f theoretical frameworks for neural processing in, 816–818, 817f parietal cortex in. See Parietal cortex/lobe premotor cortex in. See Premotor cortex primary motor cortex in. See Primary motor cortex proprioceptive reflexes in, 779 sensory feedback and descending motor commands in, 773–778 modulation of inhibitory interneurons and Renshaw cells, 775–776, 776f modulation of synaptic efficiency of primary sensory fibers, 777–778, 777f monosynaptic reflex pathway in, 773 muscle spindle afferent activity, 773–775, 775f reflex pathway transmission, 776 spatial summation technique for testing, 774f spinal interneurons in, 778–779 activation of, prior to movement, 779 propriospinal neurons in movement of upper limb, 778–779, 778f Vomeronasal organ (VNO), 691, 692f, 1272, 1273f Vomiting, pattern generator neurons on, 994 von Békésy, Georg, 603 von Economo, Constantin, 1083 von Helmholtz, Hermann. See Helmholtz, Hermann von V r . See Resting membrane potential (Vr r ) v-SNAREs, 150, 345 W

"Waiter task," 723

Wakefulness

ascending arousal system promotion of,

1082, 1084–1085

EEG in, 1081, 1081f

19/01/21 9:18 AM


Index

Walking. See also Locomotion

after spinal cord injury in humans, 809,

810b Wernicke's area anatomy of, 17, 17f damage to, 18, 20

Wnt signaling pathway, lithium on, 1520

Wolpaw, Jonathan, 779

Wolpert, Daniel, 464

Woolsey, Clinton, 829, 841 Words. See also Language learning; Language processing prosodic cues for, 1376 rules for combining of, 1372 Working memory. See Memory, short-term Wundt, Wilhelm, 387 X X chromosome, L- and M-pigment genes

XX genotype, 1261 XX sex-reversed male, 1261 XY genotype, 1261 Y Y chromosome, in sexual differentiation,

Zona limitans intrathalamica, 1115, 1115f Zone of tactile sensitivity, receptive fields in, 438–439, 442f Zotterman, Yngve, 395, 416

| hip extension in, 795, 798f learning new patterns of, 731, 732f, 928 swing phase of extensor muscle sensory feedback in, 798, 799f proprioception in, 795, 798f Wall, Patrick, 488 Waller, Augustus, 1238 Wallerian degeneration, 1238, 1240 Wang, Xiaoqin, 673 Waring, Clive, 1312–1313 Warm receptors, 423 Warm-up phenomenon, 1439 Water balance, 1031–1033, 1032f Waters of hydration, 167, 168f–169f Watson, John B., 1483 Waxman, Steven, 427 Weber, Ernst, 387, 1393 Weber-Fechner law, 601 Weber’s law of adaptation, 541, 542f Weiskrantz, Lawrence, 1055, 1475 Weiss, Paul, 142–143, 1166–1167 Wender, Paul, 1490–1491 Wernicke, Carl, 10, 16–17, 1370, 1378 Wernicke-Geschwind model in aphasia classification, 1378–1379, 1379t of language processing, 1379–1380 Wernicke’s aphasia characteristics of, 17 differential diagnosis of, 1379t lesion sites and damage in, 1384, 1385f spontaneous speech production and repetition in, 1384, 1384t  language processing in, 17 Wertheimer, Max, 497 Wessberg, Johan, 419 Westling, Gören, 446 Whisker-barrel system, 352f–353f, 456b–457b, 456f–457f White matter age-related loss of, 1564 in spinal cord, 77–79, 78f Whittaker, Victor, 337 Whole-cell plasticity, 1097 Wide-dynamic-range neurons, 431, 474 Widener, George, 1530f Wiesel, Torsten on contour analysis, 507–508 on orientation selectivity, 547 on sensory deprivation, 1213–1214, 1215f–1217f on stereoscopic vision, 1217–1218 on visual cortex anatomy and function, 515 Wightman, Mark, 359 Williams syndrome, 47, 1532 Willis, William, 427 Wilson, Sarah, 425 Wise, Steven, 831 Withdrawal, drug, 1072. See also Drug addiction Wlds mutant mice, 1238, 1238f, 1239f Wnt proteins in axon growth and guidance, 1178f, 1179 in motor neuron subtype development, 1122 in rostrocaudal neural tube patterning, 1112–1113, 1114f  on, 539–540, 539f  X-inactivation, 1532  1261  Yamins, Daniel L., 404–405  Young, Andy, 1478–1479 Z Z disks, 745–747, 748f–749f  Zigzag hairs, 419, 420f–421f  Zoghbi, Huda, 48   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Kandel-Index\_1583-1646.indd 1646

19/01/21 9:18 AM

Symbols


Capacitance (measured in farads).

## c m

Capacitance per unit length of membrane

- cylinder. C Membrane capacitance: either total input
- m capacitance of a cell (measured in units of F) or capacitance of a unit area of membrane
- (F ⋅ cm –2 ), depending on context. E Equilibrium (or Nernst) potential of an ion species, e.g., E Na , or reversal potential for current through an ion channel.
- F Faraday's constant (9.65 × 10 4 coulombs per mole). G Conductance (measured in siemens).

.

- g Conductance of a population of ion channels to one or more ion species, e.g., gNa
- Resting (leakage) conductance; total
- gl conductance of a population of resting (leakage) ion channels.
- I Current (measured in amperes). The flow of charge per unit time, ∆Q/∆t. Ohm's law, I = V ⋅ G , states that current flowing through
- a conductor (G) is directly proportional to the potential difference (V) imposed across it. Ic Ic Capacitive current; the current that changes the charge distribution on the lipid bilayer. Ii Ionic current; the resistive current that flows
- Il a population of resting ion channels. Im Total current crossing the cell membrane.
- Ii through ion channels. Il Leakage current; the current flowing through
- Im i Current flowing through a single ion channel.
- Q Excess positive or negative charge on each side of a capacitor (measured in coulombs).

⋅

- R Gas constant (1.99 cal ⋅ ° K –1 mol –1 ).

.

- R Resistance (measured in ohms). The reciprocal of conductance, l/G
- R Total input resistance of a cell.
- in R m Specific resistance of a unit area of membrane (measured in Ω ⋅ cm 2 ).
- r Resistance of a single ion channel. r a Axial resistance of the cytoplasmic core of an axon, per unit length (measured in Ω/cm).
- r Membrane resistance, per unit length
- m (measured in Ω ⋅ cm).

Kandel-Insidecover.indd 1




Membrane potential, Vm

in volts).

- Vr Vr Resting membrane potential. Vt Vt Threshold of membrane potential above which the neuron generates an action potential.
- Vi Potential on the inside of the cell membrane.
- Vin Vo Vout Potential on the outside of the cell membrane.
- Z Valence.
- γ Conductance of a single ion channel, e.g., γN
- λ

γNa

Cell membrane length constant (typical

values 0.1–1.0 mm). λ =

r

- m a t Cell membrane time constant; the product of

/r

rm/ra
√

- resistance and capacitance of the membrane (typical values 1–20 ms). t = R m ⋅ C m

Units of Measurement

A

Ampere, measure of electric current

## (SI base unit). One ampere of current

represents the movement of 1 coulomb of

m, non-

-

–3

A

–2

).

18/12/20 10:48 AM

| - charge per second. Å Ångström, measure of length (10 –10 SI unit). C Coulomb, measure of quantity of  - electricity, electric charge (expressed in SI base units s ⋅ A).  - F Farad, measure of capacitance (expressed in SI base units m 2 ⋅ kg– g–1 ⋅ s 4 ⋅ A 2 ). Hz Hertz, measure of frequency (expressed  - in s –1 ). M Molar measure of concentration of a solu  - tion (moles of solute per liter of solution). mol Mole, measure of amount of substance (Sl  - base unit). mol wt Molecular weight.  - S Siemens, measure of conductance (expressed in SI base units m– m–2 kg– g–1 . s 3 A 2 ).  ⋅  ⋅  V  Volt, measure of electric potential, electro-  - motive force (expressed in SI base units m 2 ⋅ kg ⋅ s –3 ⋅ A –1 ). One volt is the energy  - required to move 1 coulomb a distance of 1 meter against a force of 1 newton. Measurements in cells are in the range of millivolts (mV). Ω Ohm, measure of electric resistance (expressed in SI base units m 2 ⋅ kg ⋅ s   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

=

Q/C

in

(measured

⋅
